Reforms proposed in the European Union’s “Fit for 55” climate policy package are likely to sharply increase the cost paid by European firms for their greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Recognizing that increased carbon prices would put European firms at a disadvantage in competing with imports from countries that produce without incurring these costs, the European Commission has proposed a Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) requiring that the most carbon-intensive EU imports either incur comparable carbon charges as EU firms or pay the equivalent of a carbon-based tariff. The CBAM aims to deter carbon leakage, which could arise if firms shift carbon-intensive production out of Europe to facilities in countries that do not tax GHG emissions (or tax at a low rate) and then export the goods to Europe. European production and output would suffer and global climate efforts to reduce GHG emissions would be undercut. The loftier goal is to encourage other countries to follow the European example and strengthen their own national decarbonization policies, which in turn would exempt their goods from CBAM charges.
The CBAM would cover five carbon-intensive industries: iron and steel, aluminum, fertilizer, electricity, and cement. Countries most affected by the CBAM include Russia, China, Turkey, the United Kingdom, Ukraine, South Korea, and India. Some are likely to contest the policy, claiming that the CBAM is a unilateral measure that violates World Trade Organization rules and bolsters protectionism while hampering rather than encouraging efforts in other countries to tackle climate change. A better and more feasible approach would be adoption of a CBAM moratorium while negotiations are conducted to promote carbon abatement policies that comply with the rules-based global trading system.

Rapidly expanding digital flows have significantly contributed to world economic growth. The exponential expansion of digital flows since 2005 has partially compensated for lethargic growth in global conventional trade and foreign direct investment flows. COVID-19 accelerated the digital revolution in 2020, as businesses and consumers increasingly “went digital” in everything from online education and work to shopping. Many countries, particularly the United States, have enormous commercial and cultural interests in preserving the freedom of cross-border digital traffic. Strong international agreements can keep digital highways open, but agreements reached so far do too little to discipline government practices that threaten to restrict digital flows, allowing ample room for ideological and protectionist obstacles. A new and better agreement is necessary to safeguard the growth of digital flows.

As the US economy rebounds amid elevated inflationary pressures and Europe grows at a rapid clip, an uneven global rebound looms. Although emerging-market and developing economies (EMDEs) generally retain good access to global capital markets for now, their relatively slow pace of COVID-19 vaccination will continue to hamper their economic recoveries and strain their public finances—already stretched owing to the fiscal pressures of the pandemic over the past year and a half. Higher interest rates in the rich countries, particularly the United States, could tip EMDEs into liquidity and even solvency crises. The likelihood of crises is higher if advanced-economy central banks move abruptly, surprising markets. Global policymakers should prepare now by enhancing mechanisms for providing liquidity to EMDEs and, in cases of insolvency, for restructuring their sovereign debts. Perhaps even more important, the scope for uneven recovery can be limited if rich countries make an all-out effort to deliver vaccines globally and enhance less prosperous countries’ infrastructures for getting shots into arms.

For all the long-term benefits of urgently addressing climate change, economic policymakers must plan for a challenging transition to carbon neutrality. Pretending that the costs will be trivial is dangerous. Estimates by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change of the United Nations indicate that emergency action is indispensable to limit catastrophic climate disruption. Because of the magnitude of the efforts involved and the pace of the transformation implied, the accelerated transition to a carbon-neutral economy is bound to have serious, immediate economic implications, warns Pisani-Ferry. Some equipment will lose economic value. Some plants will have to close. Employees will have to be reallocated to other occupations. Investment will have to increase, to repair or rebuild infrastructure and the capital stock. He argues that so far policymakers have not addressed these implications in a systematic manner. It is high time policymakers realize that climate policy is also macroeconomic policy and design transition strategies now.

In 2012, the Federal Reserve formally adopted an inflation target and set it at 2 percent, in line with the level chosen by many other central banks. In hindsight, this setting left policymakers with too little room to cut interest rates when they want to fight recessions. Many researchers have noted that if central banks raised their inflation targets—either individually or in concert—they could do a better job in the long run of keeping inflation near its target and the workforce fully employed. Reifschneider and Wilcox highlight an additional and less-noted consequence of raising the inflation target modestly: The economy could enjoy a temporary but substantial boom in employment and output as it adjusted to the increase in the target. Critical to generating this favorable outcome would be decisive action by monetary policymakers to ensure that the higher inflation target is achieved in a reasonably timely manner. In light of substantial transition benefits, as well as the long-run improvement in economic performance, the authors recommend that the Federal Reserve raise its inflation target to 3 percent as part of its next framework review.

This Policy Brief assesses the extent to which the United States increased its imports from South Korea after the US imposition of tariffs on Chinese exports. Korea benefited from this shift in US imports, although the increase was relatively small in most sectors. The authors use highly disaggregated US import and tariff data to examine adjustments in US purchases of manufactured goods from its trade partners. Their analysis indicates that Korea made a small gain in the US market following the levying of US tariffs on Chinese exports, with Korea’s share of overall US manufacturing imports rising 0.9 percent and its share of US manufacturing imports subject to trade war tariffs rising 1.0 percent. Gains were spread across a variety of manufacturing sectors—such as wood products, textiles and apparel, and machinery—reflecting both the choices made by US officials regarding which Chinese exports to tax and the nature of preexisting trade relationships between South Korea and the United States.

The benefits of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) for South Korea are limited and need to be supplemented by more comprehensive agreements that deepen Korea’s ties to strategic allies in the Asia-Pacific region. RCEP's most important achievement is its new regional content rule that will encourage deeper integration of supply chains across the 15 markets, a key benefit for Korean industries invested in the region. But Schott notes that the pact also has significant limitations. To complement RCEP, he recommends that South Korea move forward with two other trade negotiating priorities, membership in the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) and upgrading the Korea-US Free Trade Agreement (KORUS), the latter aimed at encouraging US reengagement in the Asia-Pacific integration pact.

South Korea was one of the first countries affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020. A combination of high societal discipline and competent and prompt government actions on mass testing capacity and technologically enabled tracing and quarantines enabled South Korea to quickly control the pandemic. Consequently, South Korea did not need to enter into full economic lockdown in early 2020 and needed only much smaller fiscal stimulus than most other advanced economies. The limited fiscal impact of COVID-19 is fortuitous for South Korea, as the pandemic coincided with the country’s dramatic demographic transition to a future of rapidly shrinking working-age population and accelerating overall aging. South Korea recorded the lowest total fertility rate of any advanced economy in 2020. Unless fertility rates rise, the country will not escape large and negative economic effects from what will be a rapidly declining total and working-age population. Kirkegaard proposes several policy reforms for South Korea, while arguing that the direct role of government action in increasing the South Korean fertility levels is likely to be modest.

South Korea has been exceedingly successful in suppressing the virus that causes COVID-19. It benefited enormously from the adoption of a stringent set of public health measures that turned out to have been highly appropriate for addressing this particular health crisis and from the acquiescence of its population in adopting those measures, which included aggressive testing, contact tracing, quarantining, and graduated treatment of people with COVID-19. The United States did not adopt comparable public health measures. Even if it had done so, it is highly debatable whether the population would have tolerated them. Jung and Wilcox provide an overview of the course of the disease in each country, review the health outcomes, and describe the impact of the pandemic on key economic indicators, including real GDP, employment and unemployment, and inflation. They examine the policy choices that contributed to the outcomes in each country and conclude by identifying near-term priorities for both countries.

China’s Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region is the locus of one of the largest campaigns of government-inflicted human rights abuses in the world. It is also a pivotal source of products, including cotton and refined silica, that feed into global supply chains. This situation presents the United States and other countries with the difficult task of addressing abuses in a country and region that is central to the global economy. Hendrix and Noland outline a variety of economic and diplomatic policies that might be brought to bear in order to both ameliorate conditions in Xinjiang and ensure that global consumers are not accomplices to these abuses by buying products produced with forced labor. Options include a program of presumptive restrictions on imports from Xinjiang; mandatory due diligence laws; individually targeted sanctions against perpetrators and sanctions against firms aiding and abetting the abuses through the production of surveillance technology; and more symbolic acts, such as naming and shaming in the United Nations and boycotting the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympic Games.
Successive US administrations have embraced economic sanctions, especially financial sanctions, to punish bad actors in Iran, North Korea, Russia, and other hostile countries. Often, US officials leverage the economic pressure on their targets by forcing individuals and companies outside the United States to stop transacting with those on the US sanctions list or face severe penalties. European governments have instituted blocking regulations to prohibit compliance with such extraterritorial US sanctions against their nationals, but with limited success. Most companies forsake business in countries targeted by US sanctions rather than risk losing access to the US market. China is now adopting new blocking rules to nullify the effect of foreign sanctions or other measures “unjustifiably applied” against Chinese nationals. The new rules allow Chinese government officials to issue orders prohibiting Chinese companies from complying with foreign sanctions, essentially forcing them to choose between access to the Chinese market and access to the US market, with penalties possible in either direction. For decades weak foreign pushback allowed unilateral sanctions to remain a relatively powerful tool of US economic statecraft, but the Chinese blocking rules signal a major change to the status quo. The authors argue that multinational firms operating abroad are increasingly at risk of being caught firmly between US sanctions, including export controls, and Chinese countermeasures. These pressures add to growing US-China trade frictions already pushing the restructuring of global supply chains.

An intense debate has erupted over whether the unprecedented size of the US fiscal stimulus will cause the US economy to overheat and generate high inflation. To date, the debate has focused primarily on the United States, even though many other developed economies responded to the COVID-19 crisis with unprecedented economic stimulus packages. By some measures, Japan stands out: The total amount of its three consecutive stimulus packages is estimated to exceed 50 percent of its GDP, about twice as high as the US fiscal packages (about 26 percent of US GDP). However, overheating concerns are not being actively raised for Japan. This Policy Brief finds that although Japan’s headline number looks astonishingly high, the actual size of its discretionary fiscal measures is about 16 percent of GDP, substantially smaller than the total size of the US packages. US fiscal stimulus is the largest among Group of Seven (G7) countries relative to GDP, justifying the attention economists have given it. The United Kingdom is estimated to spend more than Japan as a proportion of GDP, but even the UK stimulus program markedly lags behind that of the United States. If additional stimulus measures making their way through the legislative process in Canada are counted, Japan’s fiscal stimulus looks even smaller and would amount to being only average in size among G7 countries. Given this and the lackluster performance of its economy in the first quarter of 2021, it is unlikely that Japan will find itself in overheating territory any time soon.

COVID-19 vaccination programs are generally understood to be a prerequisite for a return to normalcy in our social and economic lives. Emergency measures to research, test, produce, and distribute vaccines have been expensive, but increases in GDP resulting from the vaccines are expected to exceed those costs by wide margins. Few studies have quantified the economic costs and benefits of different rates of COVID-19 vaccination, however. This Policy Brief focuses on developing such a quantitative assessment for the United States; the approach may be applied to other countries as well. Two illustrative scenarios support the conclusion that most plausible options to accelerate vaccinations would have economic benefits that far exceed their costs, in addition to their more important accomplishment of saving lives. This Policy Brief shows that if, for example, the United States had adopted a more aggressive policy in 2020 of unconditional contracts with vaccine producers, the up-front cost would have been higher but thousands of lives would have been saved and economic growth would have been stronger. Instead, the federal government conditioned its contracts on the vaccines’ being proven safe and effective. The projections presented in this analysis show that even if unconditional contracts led to support for vaccines that failed the phase III trial and ultimately were not used, the cost would have been worth it.

The COVID-19 shock has exacerbated the struggles of many emerging-market and developing economies (EMDEs) to repay their external debt. One of the most urgent challenges relates to debt owed to China, whose lending spree under its Belt and Road Initiative and other programs has played an outsized role in what amounts to a crisis for many countries. The scope of the problem is striking. China is owed more than $100 billion, or 57 percent of all debt owed to official creditors by the countries that need help the most. China is not a member of the Paris Club of official creditors, which coordinates, within a multilateral framework, the resolution of general sovereign illiquidity or unsustainable external debt of EMDEs. There is an urgent need to put in place more effective, long-term solutions to help durably lower the risks of prolonged debt difficulties in EMDEs. These problems could be partly addressed by creating creditor committees to coordinate debt relief with China. The Group of Twenty (G20) has taken some steps to include creditor committees in the context of the Common Framework for Debt Treatments beyond the Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI), but only for low-income countries that qualify for the DSSI and only for official creditors. To better address debt distress, it needs to extend the approach, especially to middle-income debtor countries.

New business applications have surged in the United States since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. The growth is driven largely by startups in online retail, transportation, and personal services. Many of these new entrepreneurs are self-employed and were likely laid off and forced into entrepreneurship by necessity. No official data are available yet on the number of businesses destroyed in 2020, because business data for firms that close without entering bankruptcy are lagging. But the authors calculate that firm births may have surpassed firm deaths during the pandemic. While this boom in business entry is a tribute to the adaptability and potential innovative spirit in US capitalism, one should not be overly optimistic about jobs created in this wave of startups. As many of these new startups are by people forced to strike out on their own, the number of jobs created per new firm is even smaller than it was during previous US recessions. And like online businesses started around the last recession (e.g., Uber, Airbnb, and Venmo), some of these new firms may turn out to be major contenders in their sectors, displacing workers employed by their traditional rivals.

Despite many significant gains by women in the paid workforce in recent decades, the percentage of women participating in the labor force has remained lower than the percentage of male participants. Now, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the global economic downturn it precipitated, the gap in labor force participation between men and women in some economies has actually widened, with potentially damaging repercussions for women’s career prospects and pay. The pandemic has disproportionately affected sectors employing more women, such as retail stores, restaurants, and the hotel and hospitality business. An increase in family caregiving responsibilities because of school and childcare closures has also fallen on working mothers' shoulders. Both factors have pulled women out of the labor force. The authors track trends in male and female labor force participation in 43 countries and find substantial differences across countries in the way women’s participation has been affected relative to that of men. In some countries, such as Colombia, Chile, and Cyprus, the gender gap in labor force participation widened the most during the pandemic. The gender gap also widened in the United States, driving 2.5 million women from their jobs in what Vice President Kamala Harris called a “national emergency” for women. In other economies, such as Luxembourg and Lithuania, the gender gap in labor force participation, unexpectedly, shrank during the early period of the pandemic. On average, female employees have fared better in countries where women are less concentrated in the services sector, less likely to be employed as temporary workers, and where laws supported greater equality at the onset of the crisis. Greater government expenditure on childcare in the pre-COVID-19 era, however, does not appear to have insulated female workers from the damaging repercussions of the pandemic.

A new consensus on fiscal policy has emerged in advanced economies, that stimulus is both needed and feasible. At first blush, the scope for stimulus seems even greater in emerging markets, since their primary deficits are smaller and interest-growth differentials more favorable, suggesting that they can sustain much higher levels of debt. But more careful analysis suggests that this is not the case. The authors point out that what matters for debt sustainability are not current conditions but rather the range of possible future outcomes. And prospects for interest rates and growth are more uncertain in emerging markets, while primary balances are more difficult to adjust. As a result, debt limits are in fact tighter than advanced economies. Taking India as a case study, the authors argue that what is needed in the current situation is responsible, slow fiscal adjustment. More generally, one should be careful about importing wholesale the new fiscal consensus into emerging markets.

A frequently voiced complaint from the Trump administration was that US firms have faced a competitive disadvantage in exports because the US market is open and US tariffs are low but US trading partners protect their markets with high tariffs. The administration used this concern to justify raising US tariffs whenever it could. Lawrence argues that these claims should be more nuanced and account for the extensive unilateral liberalization by many countries over the past 30 years and that the grievances that motivated the Trump trade policies are increasingly misplaced. Many developing countries have reduced their tariffs unilaterally to rates that are far lower than they applied three decades ago and far less than the bound rates reflected in their World Trade Organization (WTO) obligations. Globally, on average, tariffs were not raised during the global financial crisis of 2008 and continued to decline through at least 2018. Even when shocks from imports resulted in serious injury to domestic industries, several developing countries temporarily provided safeguard protection but at levels that were lower than their WTO bound rates. This evidence of import liberalization also suggests that rising protectionism was not responsible for the slow growth in world trade that has been evident since 2011. It remains uncertain whether countries will now respond to disruptions to global supply chains since 2018 caused by Trump’s trade policies and the COVID-19 pandemic by reversing their tariff liberalization stance, but the sustained enthusiasm for new megaregional trade agreements suggests many countries will not.

One economic argument for government subsidies is that they are necessary to compensate firms and industries for benefits they provide to society at large but cannot capture in the prices they charge for goods or services. For example, subsidies to renewable energy are defended because renewable energy limits carbon emissions. When a major economy subsidizes extensively, however, its trading partners are drawn into the game, with losses all around. As the prisoner’s dilemma suggests, a better outcome would entail mutual restraint. But the goal of mutual restraint is no less difficult in international trade than it is in international arms control. Both the European Union and the US federal system try, in different ways, to regulate industrial subsidies. Hufbauer examines efforts to contain unjustifiable subsidies and proposes modest improvements, bearing in mind that as countries struggle to overcome the global economic downturn resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, there is little appetite for restoring a free market economy—one in which firms compete with minimum government assistance or regulation. Selective upgrading of the rulebook may nevertheless be possible.

In the last two decades, sovereign wealth funds (SWFs)—funds accumulated by a government that are invested in whole or in part abroad to benefit the country in the future—have faced increased public scrutiny over their investment patterns, financial results, and governance. This Policy Brief updates and expands a prototype scoreboard rating the transparency and accountability of SWFs, which Truman established in 2007. This fifth edition of the scoreboard shows that the average scores continued to improve for the 64 SWFs examined, but governance issues remain. New funds have emerged—many of them government holding companies or strategic investment funds—but the growth of assets under management by SWFs has slowed, in some cases partly because of withdrawals to help finance expenses related to the COVID-19 pandemic, raising questions about their future role.
Among the best-known sovereign wealth funds (SWFs)—government-owned or controlled investment vehicles—are those funded by hydrocarbon revenues in the member economies of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), which comprises all the Arab countries in the Persian Gulf except Iraq, namely Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. This Policy Brief compares the GCC SWFs with each other and with other funds in terms of their transparency and accountability on the fifth SWF scoreboard, available here. Several factors, including the decline in oil prices in recent years, have slowed the growth of the GCC’s SWFs. This slower growth could further diminish their governance and transparency standards, which are already weaker than those of other SWFs. Efforts to improve their governance and accountability will be important to garner public support for these SWFs.

Orszag, Rubin, and Stiglitz outline a new fiscal framework that they argue would better equip policymakers to face deep uncertainties about future interest rates (which, they say, may not remain low forever), hard-to-predict global shocks, and climate risks. They reject fiscal anchors—simple limits on deficits or debt as a share of GDP that governments adopt to check their spending and borrowing—that have historically guided fiscal policy and believe any attempts to modify such targets for the current period of low interest rates are likely to fail. Instead they propose making the budget respond more automatically to economic distress (through stronger automatic stabilizers) and to long-term fiscal pressures (e.g., embedding adjustment mechanisms in health care and pension programs), as well as creating an infrastructure program and extending debt maturities to insure against interest rate changes. Such a "streamlined dashboard" would then allow policymakers to use discretion as necessary to take any additional actions—either to provide more stimulus during short-term difficulties or to adjust the automatic features themselves—rather than adhering to fiscal targets that may no longer be appropriate when economic conditions change.

China’s policies in Xinjiang, Hong Kong, and the South China Sea and its ongoing support for Iran, North Korea, and Venezuela pose major challenges for the United States, where bipartisan pressure is growing to ramp up punitive sanctions against leading Chinese firms and financial institutions. Financial sanctions freeze the US assets or bar US entry of the targeted individuals and firms and prohibit US financial firms from doing business with them. Schott explains why US officials should carefully weigh the risks to international financial markets and US economic interests before imposing punitive sanctions on major financial institutions engaged with China. The collateral costs of such sanctions would be sizable, damaging US producers, financial institutions, and US alliances. By restricting access of major banks to international payments in US dollars and barring use of messaging systems like SWIFT, tougher US financial sanctions would effectively “weaponize” the dollar; friends and foes alike would be pushed to seek alternatives to dollar transactions that, over time, would weaken the international role of the dollar. Instead of doubling down on current unilateral financial sanctions, US policy should deploy sanctions in collaboration with allies and calibrate trade and financial controls to match the expected policy achievements.

Despite predictions by some observers that the United States and China are headed for a “decoupling,” China’s integration into global financial markets is accelerating. Regulatory reform has opened China’s financial market to many US and other foreign financial institutions. Foreign ownership of onshore Chinese stocks and bonds is growing rapidly and is likely to continue to expand in 2021. And inbound foreign direct investment (FDI) is on track to hit a new record in 2020.
This integration is very asymmetric, however. China retains relatively tight control over both outbound direct investment and outflows of portfolio capital. US efforts to roll back the trend of deepening financial integration by threatening to delist Chinese companies traded on US markets and prohibiting any US investment in 35 Chinese companies that the Department of Defense alleges to be linked to the Chinese military appear to be largely symbolic.

Good international economic policy requires good comparative data on national economic performance. In May 2020, the World Bank published the latest comprehensive update of purchasing power parities (PPPs), as part of the International Comparison Program. Produced for 176 countries, these PPPs are used to convert data (especially GDP and other quantities based on national income accounts) from national currencies to a common basis in a way that is meaningful for economic analysis. PPP-adjusted data are essential because the distortions caused by sharp exchange rate movements are significant, especially for times of macroeconomic turbulence.
The newly released PPP data contain fewer surprises than those published in previous updates and are an invaluable tool, but Honohan explains why PPPs should be used with caution and an understanding of their limitations. Apart from removing distortions caused by market exchange rate movements, PPPs remove the impact of other factors affecting relative prices, especially productivity differences, which Honohan argues should not be removed if one wishes to compare the overall economic size or strength of a country or region. Adjusting for productivity, he finds that the United States retains its position as the world’s largest economy for the time being, and the European Union (even without the United Kingdom) is just ahead of China.

President Donald Trump launched a trade war to eliminate the longstanding US trade deficit. But the trade deficit has only grown on his watch because tariffs were the wrong policy choice. Trade deficits are not always a bad thing, but a wealthy country like the United States should not run a perpetual deficit. Decades of US trade deficits have piled up debt that makes future generations of Americans less well off, as they must pay interest and dividends to foreigners. Cheap imports and the decline in exports have also contributed to the loss of a significant number of US manufacturing jobs. The main cause of the deficit is a secular overvaluation of the dollar, driven by excessive financial flows into dollar assets from foreign official and private investors. Although Trump’s policies have failed, achieving balanced trade is not a hopeless quest. President-elect Joseph Biden should direct his Treasury secretary to pursue a more sensible dollar policy that can tame the deficit without violating any international norms or rules.

In March 2020, most countries implemented stringent measures—closing schools and workplaces, limiting public gatherings, and curbing travel—to reduce the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which causes COVID-19. Using the Oxford Stringency Index and smartphone data from Google, Maire examines the effects of the stringent measures implemented in March–May 2020 on individual mobility. The results suggest that stringent measures were more effective at reducing individual mobility in higher-income countries than in lower-income countries and that the differences reflect factors such as extreme poverty, perception of risk, the share of vulnerable employment, number of hospital beds, age distribution of the population, and population density. Understanding how the effects of lockdown measures on individual mobility differed across countries is important to determine the effectiveness of such measures on health outcomes and their impact on economic activity.

The coronavirus pandemic and an unprecedented global recession have triggered fears of a debt crisis requiring massive intervention by international financial institutions as well as debt restructuring by private and official creditors. Truman draws two lessons for the current crisis, based on his ring-side experience during the debt crises of the 1980s. First, the initiation of debt relief will require a broad consensus among four groups: the borrowing countries, their foreign creditors, the authorities of the countries in which those creditors are located, and international institutions. Reaching consensus takes time. Second, implementation of the consensus framework will be case by case, because of differences in the political and economic circumstances of each country, which will militate against simple replication for different countries and against implementation all at the same time. Any framework will not be self-implementing. While the call for rapid action is understandable, applying a one-size-fits-all approach will not be possible.

Lebanon has spent the last 20 years juggling an excessive level of debt and current account deficits. Apparent financial wizardry by the central bank (Banque du Liban) helped keep the exchange rate fixed, inflation low, and debt service flowing until 2020. But these efforts merely postponed the inevitable, at a high cost. Repeated shocks to the Lebanese economy and governance weaknesses pushed the financial contraption over the cliff before the COVID-19 outbreak. The explosion that ripped through the Port of Beirut in early August added to the disarray. The Lebanese pound has crashed, the government has defaulted on some of its debt, and restrictions have been placed on deposit withdrawals and access to foreign exchange. Lebanon faces an uncertain future of uneven suffering. It will need foreign assistance, but such assistance will not extend to covering the losses of the banking system. How the losses are distributed will set the scene for Lebanon’s future development. Policymakers should aim for fairness, predictability, and stability without overindebtedness.

As the International Monetary Fund (IMF) adapts its strategy to meet the challenges of the COVID-19 crisis, it should develop a new temporary lending instrument to assist emerging-market countries facing pandemic-related fiscal and balance of payments difficulties. A dedicated IMF Pandemic Support Facility would help meet the exceptional financing needs of emerging-market countries at a time of high uncertainty while providing more lenient repayment periods and also allow the Fund to be more flexible in its operations with minimum disruptions to its existing facilities.
Unemployment insurance in the United States has played a critical role in both protecting workers who lost their jobs and supporting the economy during the COVID-19 pandemic. The abrupt expiration of any form of expanded unemployment insurance at the end of July 2020 would create problems both for the workers directly affected and for the economy as a whole, reducing GDP by about 2.5 percent in the second half of 2020—more than a typical year’s worth of economic growth. Furman emphasizes that expanded unemployment insurance should continue, with adjustments made as the unemployment rate changes. He also points out that the unemployment insurance system had major shortcomings even before the COVID-19 crisis and should be permanently reformed.

The US package of measures to help households hit by the economic shock from the COVID-19 crisis, including the Paycheck Protection Program, is almost twice as large in proportion of GDP as the French package, but it has proven less effective in curbing unemployment because of poor design and implementation. In contrast, the increase in the unemployment rate in France has been five times less than the increase in the United States. Cohen-Setton and Pisani-Ferry dive beneath the unreliable headline numbers to assess the effectiveness of government support provided to households in March–May 2020 in the two countries. They conclude that the French approach (mirrored in some other European countries) delivered a bigger bang for the buck. But the fact that the US approach has fallen short should not diminish the significance of the policy shift signaled by the enactment of measures to maintain household income.

The measures that most governments took in response to the sudden collapse in economic activity during the COVID-19 lockdowns nearly exclusively focused on protecting vulnerable workers and firms. These measures included unemployment benefits, grants, transfers, loans at low rates, and tax deferrals. As lockdowns are lifted, governments must shift policies toward supporting the recovery and design measures that will limit the pain of adjustment while preserving productive jobs and firms. This Policy Brief explores how such measures can be designed, with particular emphasis on Europe and the United States. The authors propose a combination of unemployment benefits to help workers, wage subsidies and partially guaranteed loans to help firms, and debt restructuring procedures for small and medium-sized companies handicapped by excessive legacy debt from the crisis.

Despite steady progress, women remain grossly underrepresented in corporate leadership worldwide. The share of women executive officers and board members increased between 1997 and 2017, but progress was not uniform. Partly in response to gender quotas, the shares of female board members have risen rapidly in some countries while lagging elsewhere. This Policy Brief reports results derived from the financial records of about 62,000 publicly listed firms in 58 economies over 1997–2017, which together account for more than 92 percent of global GDP. The authors conclude that if, as emerging evidence in the literature indicates, gender diversity contributes to superior firm performance, then progress in this area could help boost productivity globally. Policymakers and corporate leaders should consider supportive public and private policies, including more gender-neutral tracking in education, firm protocols that encourage gender balance in hiring and promotion, enforceable antidiscrimination laws, public support for readily available and affordable high-quality childcare and maternity and paternity leave, and quotas.

The Summer Olympic Games are the most globalized sporting event on earth. Until now, the Summer Games had been postponed only three times—in 1916, 1940, and 1944—all because of world wars. So, the announcement that in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2020 Tokyo Games would be postponed by a year is significant, implicit testimony to the destructiveness of the pandemic. The Tokyo Games were expected to continue the evolution of the Games away from the aristocratic European milieu where the modern Olympic movement began. As poverty has declined and incomes across the global economy have converged, participation in the Games has broadened and the pattern of medaling has become more pluralistic, particularly in sports with low barriers to entry in terms of facilities and equipment. This Policy Brief presents forecasts of medal counts at the 2020 Tokyo Summer Games had they had gone on as scheduled, setting aside possible complications arising from the coronavirus pandemic. The forecasts are not just a depiction of what might have been. They establish a benchmark that can be used when the Games are eventually held, to examine the impact of the uneven incidence of the pandemic globally.

In the second part of their Policy Brief, Coronado and Potter discuss how the system of digital payment providers (DPPs) proposed in their first Policy Brief  on this topic adds a new weapon to the monetary toolkit that could be implemented in a timely, effective, and inclusive manner. They describe how a digital currency backed by the Federal Reserve could augment automatic fiscal stabilizers and—more importantly—harness the power of “helicopter” money or quantitative easing directly to consumers in a disciplined manner. To implement QE directly to consumers, Coronado and Potter propose the creation of recession insurance bonds (RIBs)—zero-coupon bonds authorized by Congress and calibrated as a percentage of GDP sufficient to provide meaningful support in a downturn. Congress would create these contingent securities; Treasury would credit households’ digital accounts with them. The Fed could purchase them from households in a downturn after its policy rate hits zero. The Fed’s balance sheet would grow by the value of RIBs purchased; the initial matching liability would be deposits into the DPP system. The mechanism is easy for consumers to understand and could boost inflation expectations more than a debt-financed fiscal stimulus could.

The US monetary system faces significant challenges from advances in technology and changes in the macroeconomy that, left unaddressed, will threaten the stability of the US economy and financial system. At the same time, low interest rates mean that central banks will not have the policy ammunition they had in the past during the next recession. The Federal Reserve needs new tools to meet its mandates of price stability and maximum employment. It also needs to preserve the safety and soundness of the financial system in a rapidly digitizing world. The authors propose a Fed-backed digital currency to solve both problems. Their proposal creates a regulated system of digital currency accounts for consumers managed by digital payment providers and fully backed by reserves at the Fed. The system would be limited in size, to preserve the functions and stability of the existing banking system. Fed backing would mean low capital requirements, which would in turn facilitate competition. Low fees and no minimum balance requirements in the new system would also help financial institutions reach the roughly 25 percent of the US population that is currently either unbanked or underbanked. Digital accounts for consumers could also provide a powerful new stabilization tool for both monetary and fiscal policies. For fiscal policy, it could facilitate new automatic stabilizers while also allowing the Fed to provide quantitative easing directly to consumers. This tool could be used in a timely manner with broad reach to all Americans.

The Trump administration’s Africa strategy is rooted in three misconceptions about China’s African footprint—and a fourth about US-Africa economic relations—that are either factually incorrect or overstated in terms of the broader strategic challenges they pose to US interests: (1) Chinese engagement in Africa crowds out opportunities for trade and investment with and from the United States; (2) Chinese engagement in Africa is resource-seeking—to the detriment of US interests; (3) Chinese engagement in Africa is designed to foster debt-based coercive diplomacy; and (4) US-Africa economic linkages are all one-way and concessionary (i.e., aid-based). Hendrix finds little evidence to suggest Chinese trade and investment ties crowd out US trade and investment opportunities. China’s resource-seeking bent is evident in investment patterns, but it is more a function of Africa’s having comparatively large, undercapitalized resource endowments than China’s attempt to corner commodity markets. Chinese infrastructural development—particularly large projects associated with the Belt and Road Initiative—may result in increased African indebtedness to the Chinese, but there is little reason to think debt per se will vastly expand Chinese military capacity in the region. And finally, US-Africa economic relations are much less one-sided and concessionary (i.e., aid-based) than conventional wisdom suggests.

With interest rates persistently low or even negative in advanced countries, policymakers have barely any room to ease monetary policy when the next recession hits. Fiscal policy will have to play a major and likely dominant role in stimulating the economy, requiring policymakers to fundamentally reconsider fiscal policy. Blanchard and Summers argue for the introduction of what they call “semiautomatic” stabilizers. Unlike purely automatic stabilizers (mechanisms built into government budgets that automatically—without discretionary government action or explicit triggers—increase spending or decrease taxes when the economy slows or enters a recession), semiautomatic stabilizers are targeted tax or spending measures that are triggered if, say, the output growth rate declines or the unemployment rate increases beyond a specified threshold. The authors argue that the trigger should be changes in unemployment rather than changes in output, and the design of semiautomatic stabilizers, whether they focus on mechanisms that rely primarily on income or on intertemporal substitution effects (changing the timing of consumption), depends crucially on the design of discretionary policy.

By refusing to fill vacancies in the World Trade Organization’s (WTO) Appellate Body—the top body that hears appeals and rules on trade disputes—the Trump administration has paralyzed the key component of the dispute settlement system. No nation or group of nations has more at stake in salvaging this system than the world’s big emerging-market economies: Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, and Thailand, among others. These countries have actively and successfully used the dispute settlement system to defend their commercial interests abroad and resolve inevitable trade conflicts. The authors suggest that even though the developing countries did not create the Appellate Body crisis, they may hold a key to unlock it. The Trump administration has also focused its ire on a longstanding WTO practice of giving these economies latitude to seek “special and differential treatment” in trade negotiations because of their developing-country status. The largest developing economies, which have a significant stake in preserving a two-step, rules-based mechanism for resolving trade disputes, could play a role in driving a potential bargain to save the appeals mechanism. They could unite to give up that special status in return for a US commitment to end its boycott of the nomination of Appellate Body members.
US refusal to allow the appointment of new judges (or members) to the World Trade Organization’s Appellate Body—a key component of its renowned dispute settlement system—has pushed the organization into an existential crisis. The Appellate Body no longer has the requisite number of members to hear new cases on appeal. The terms of two of the three remaining members have expired, leaving the WTO without an appeal function. US officials charge that certain Appellate Body decisions on WTO dispute panel rulings have expanded WTO obligations and constrained WTO rights—what trade lawyers call “judicial overreach”—and so they have blocked the appointment of new Appellate Body members until other WTO countries address US complaints. Schott and Jung analyze the WTO cases brought against the United States and find that the problem of judicial overreach seems to surface primarily in a subset of US losses in antidumping and countervailing duty (AD/CVD) cases that target specific methods of calculating dumping margins. They warn that disabling the whole appellate system is a disproportionate response to the specific problem. It will weaken enforcement of WTO obligations and undermine prospects for negotiations to update the WTO rulebook, thus corroding the rules-based trading system, one that has been modeled on US law and practice. A better approach would be to exempt AD/CVD cases from appellate review (while still subjecting them to dispute panel rulings). This targeted change in the WTO Appellate Body process, coupled with procedural reforms already advanced in proposals that have been widely supported by WTO members, could mitigate US concerns and allow the Appellate Body to be repopulated.

Central banks in the three largest advanced economies (the United States, Japan, and the eurozone) have only limited ammunition to fight a recession based on the tools used to date. The Federal Reserve has the most amount of tried and tested ammunition in this group. If a recession were to hit the US economy now, the Fed would be able to deliver monetary stimulus equivalent to a cut in the short-term policy interest rate of about 5 percentage points, which is sufficient to fight a mild but not severe recession. The European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan have little ability to ease policy with tools used to date, about the equivalent of a 1 percentage point cut in the policy rate. But they can engage in more exotic forms of monetary policy, such as large-scale purchases of equity and real estate and direct transfers to households, which the Fed cannot do. These tools, however, are largely untested and face political resistance. An important implication of this analysis is that raising expected inflation before a recession hits has a much larger benefit than has been widely recognized. A higher long-run inflation rate gives central banks more room to not only cut their policy rates but also use forward guidance and quantitative easing to reduce longer-term rates.

The terms of the US-China trade war change often, but the tariff escalations have inflicted documented economic damage on both countries. Expanding the conflict will only increase the damage and reverberate across the world economy. This Policy Brief uses a computable general equilibrium model of the global economy to analyze three scenarios that could unfold in coming months. The first scenario is the current situation (as of June 2019). Two additional scenarios assume implementation of proposed US tariffs and Chinese responses. The models project the situation after the two countries and the rest of the world adjust across a time horizon of three to five years. For the United States, higher tariffs raise prices and reduce demand for consumers and producers. For China, the tariffs raise the prices of consumer goods but have less direct impact on producers, because the Chinese have exempted some intermediate inputs. US exports and imports decline under all three scenarios. But China can successfully divert its exports away from the United States and escape maximum economic damage.

The Federal Reserve faces two important monetary policy challenges: First, since the Great Recession it has struggled to move inflation convincingly up to the 2 percent target level. Second, during the next recession it will struggle to deliver enough support to the economy unless the recession is unusually mild. As a result, the search is on for alternative policy frameworks that might allow the Fed to achieve its monetary policy objectives more effectively. Among the alternatives is average inflation targeting (AIT). The basic idea is simple: Instead of aiming to return inflation over the medium term to the target rate of 2 percent, the Fed would aim to return the average of inflation over some period to the target rate. The crucial innovation of AIT is that when inflation has been running below the target rate, it would have the Fed aim for above-target inflation in the future, in order to bring average inflation up toward the target. Simulations of the Fed’s workhorse econometric model of the US economy (the FRB/US model) suggest that AIT would be a weak addition to the Fed’s policy toolkit for dealing with recessions and persistently low inflation. In addition, simple versions of AIT would sometimes compel the Fed to run an undesirably restrictive monetary policy. AIT is thus not a very appealing alternative to the current framework.

The fires in Brazil’s Amazon rainforest in the summer of 2019 represent a government policy failure over many years, especially recently, as Brazilian public agencies that are supposed to curb man-made fires have been deliberately weakened. In keeping with his far-right nationalist campaign promises, President Jair Bolsonaro’s government has intentionally backed away from efforts to combat climate change and preserve the environment, which has emboldened farmers, loggers, and other players to engage in predatory activities in the rainforest. De Bolle calculates that if the current rate of deforestation is maintained over the next few years, the Amazon would be dangerously close to the estimated “tipping point” as soon as 2021, beyond which the rainforest can no longer generate enough rain to sustain itself. The tragic fires have demonstrated that protecting the Amazon rainforest is a global cause. The international attention provides an opportunity for the governments of Brazil and the United States to stop denying climate change and cooperate on strategies to preserve the rainforest and develop ways to sustainably use its natural resources. The international community should revive and expand the Amazon Fund to invest in ways to reduce deforestation through the possible use of payments for environmental services. Brazil should adopt and enforce regulations on land use in the Amazon region while cracking down on illegal uses, such as logging and mining, and should restore conditional rural credit policies to fight deforestation.
Note: The estimates for 2019 to 2021 were calculated by maintaining the rate of increase in deforestation estimated between January and August 2019 by Brazil’s National Institute for Space Research (INPE). The numbers and scale of figure 1 have been corrected from an earlier published version to reflect the conversion from square kilometers to square miles. The conclusion regarding the tipping point in 2021 remains unchanged. 

In early 2019, several important members of the World Trade Organization (WTO) submitted noteworthy proposals in a realm of international commerce that has evolved faster than rules to govern it: e-commerce or digital trade. While countries agree on less controversial subjects like banning unsolicited commercial electronic messages, the three leading WTO members—China, the European Union, and the United States—have big differences in their approaches to more challenging issues: data flows, data localization, privacy invasions by data collectors, transfer of source code, imposition of customs duties and internet taxes, and internet censorship. Their differing viewpoints lead Hufbauer and Lu to conclude that the prospect of reaching a high-level WTO e-commerce agreement is not promising. To reach an agreement, either most of the contentious issues must be dropped or the number of participating countries must be sharply reduced. A WTO accord, even of low ambition, would have value if only to establish basic digital norms on matters such as banning unsolicited commercial messages and protecting online consumers from fraudulent practices. A more ambitious accord covering the controversial issues should be negotiated in bilateral and/or plurilateral/regional pacts rather than in the WTO.

The unrelenting surge in prices in Venezuela has crippled the economy and deepened the humanitarian crisis there. Huertas lays out a feasible stabilization plan to stop Venezuela’s hyperinflation. The extent of the humanitarian crisis and shortage of basic goods and services suggests that, on the fiscal side, a stabilization plan should focus primarily on reallocating rather than reducing spending. The authorities should avoid austerity policies and instead spend on taking care of the Venezuelan people. Stabilizing the price level while providing relief to the country’s population would require significant financial assistance from the rest of the world, so it is critical that Venezuela secure strong financial support from the international community. Successful stabilization requires a credible plan to transition to a responsible fiscal policy, the financial resources to carry it out, and the political will to sustain it.

For years China has been one of the world’s most rapidly growing sources of outward foreign direct investment. Since peaking in 2016, however, Chinese outward investments, primarily to the United States but also the European Union, have declined dramatically, especially in response to changes in China’s domestic rules on capital outflows and in the face of rising nationalism in the United States. Concerns about growing Chinese influence in other economies, the ascendant role of an authoritarian government in Beijing, and the possible security implications of Chinese dominance in the high-technology sector have put Chinese outward investments under intense international scrutiny. This Policy Brief analyzes the most recent trends in Chinese investments in the United States and the European Union and reviews recent political and regulatory changes both have adopted toward Chinese inward investments. It also explores the emerging transatlantic difference in the regulatory response to the Chinese information technology firm Huawei. Concerned about national security and as part of the ongoing broader trade friction with China, the United States has cracked down far harder on the company than the European Union.

For more than three decades the goal of becoming “the factory of the world” has been at the core of China’s development strategy. This strategy, in combination with high rates of domestic investment and low rates of consumption, made Chinese production the most manufacturing intensive in the world. But as its wages have risen, China’s competitiveness in the most labor-intensive manufacturing industries has eroded. Its ability to assemble products remains a major source of its exports, but it has also tried to shift toward more sophisticated value-added production domestically. Chinese domestic spending has shifted away from investment toward more consumption as citizens’ incomes have grown. Like Americans, Chinese people are also spending more on services than on manufactured goods. All these changes are fundamentally altering the structure of China’s production, reducing the role of manufacturing, and increasing the skill levels of workers in manufacturing. This Policy Brief reviews the challenges posed by these developments for China’s long-term goal of achieving more inclusive growth. It presents evidence that commonly held perceptions that Chinese manufacturing employment growth is robust are wrong. In fact, such growth has peaked and China is now following the pattern of structural change that is typical of a more mature emerging economy, in which the share of employment in manufacturing declines as workers are increasingly employed in services.

The nature and magnitude of geopolitical risk is changing more rapidly than the ability to anticipate it, with increasingly severe economic consequences. This Policy Brief discusses the economic costs and risks associated with episodes of political instability, arguing that firms, government agencies, and international institutions must update their forecasting and risk assessment efforts to take global factors into account. Since the global financial crisis, political instability has shifted from emerging-market countries in the developing world to larger, more globally impactful econo¬mies. Acknowledging this changing risk profile—and developing better tools to predict major episodes of instability—will allow both policymakers and firms to plan with greater confidence.
For decades, US multinational corporations (MNCs) conducted nearly all their research and development (R&D) within the United States. Their focus on R&D at home helped establish the United States as the unrivaled leader of innovation and technology advances in the world economy. Since the late 1990s, however, the amount of R&D conducted overseas by US MNCs has grown nearly fourfold and its geographic distribution has expanded from a few advanced industrial countries to many parts of the developing world, creating an innovation system that spans the globe. Like many aspects of globalization, including the offshoring of manufacturing over recent decades, the globalization of R&D raises concerns about US competitiveness and loss of technological leadership. At the same time, the spreading geographic location of innovation presents opportunities for US-based companies if the right policies are adopted to seize them.
The research presented in this Policy Brief demonstrates that US innovators continue to remain involved in important ways in US MNCs' global R&D activities, and fears of a hollowing out of US capacity to innovate—based probably on previous fears about the hollowing out of US-based manufacturing—may be overstated. Indeed, the large and growing pool of highly educated scientists and engineers in the developing world could increase the rate of global productivity growth, to the advantage of US-based companies and the world in general. The authors conclude that a productive way to capitalize on the globalization of MNC R&D is not to oppose it but to combine emerging-market talent with MNC experience so that innovation can flourish to improve global living standards and fuel economic progress.

Suffering under Western sanctions and security challenges, Iran faces problems as well from its fragile banking system, which has been languishing for decades. Liquidity and solvency weaknesses pose a growing risk to the country’s financial stability. The sanctions reimposed by the United States in 2018 have heightened these vulnerabilities, but the problems also result from the heavy-handed role of the state, corruption, and the Central Bank of Iran’s failure to regulate and supervise the system. Iran’s ability to avoid a run on its banks is aided by their reliance on liquidity assistance, deposit insurance, and regulatory forbearance from the central bank. Depositors are forced to be patient because they have limited options to invest elsewhere. Iran has thus avoided a full-blown banking crisis. But the situation is not sustainable. Banks remain susceptible to external shocks, which could come from a complete halt to oil exports or war.

For many years, the Japanese government has promised an eventual return to primary budget surpluses, but it has not delivered on these promises. Its latest goal is to return to primary balance by 2025. Blanchard and Tashiro, however, argue that, in the current economic environment in Japan, primary deficits may be needed for a long time, because they may be the best tool to sustain demand and output, alleviate the burden on monetary policy, and increase future output. What primary deficits are used for, however, is equally important, and the Japanese government should put them to better use. The authors recommend that, given Japan’s aging population, the government should spend on measures aimed at increasing fertility—and by implication population and output growth—which are likely to more than pay for themselves.

Faced with fluctuating oil prices and other uncertainties, the oil-rich countries of the Middle East and North Africa have made efforts—some for decades—to diversify their exports, in order to reduce their dependence on oil revenue and generate much-needed jobs. The results of these diversification efforts have been disappointing overall, raising concerns about the region's stability and potential risk to the global economy. Transparent public debates and dialogue are needed, especially with the private sector, about policies that have worked and those that have not, the costs and benefits of various diversification strategies, and improving governance of public resources being used for diversification.

The International Monetary Fund (IMF)—a quota-based institution—faces a test of its survival as the linchpin of the global financial safety net. Its roughly $1.4 trillion in total financial resources is scheduled to begin to shrink in 2020. In 2015, IMF members committed to strengthening IMF financial resources in the 15th General Review of Quotas, which will end in December 2019. Over the past 25 years, the United States has led the way for a gradual redistribution of IMF quota shares toward faster-growing emerging-market and developing countries. Any significant redistribution of quota shares requires an increase in total quotas. Because of its share of votes in the IMF, the United States must agree to any change in quotas. The Trump administration, however, has signaled that it favors no such change. If the United States does not reverse its stance, IMF members will lose an opportunity to strengthen the institution at a time of global financial uncertainty. Truman says the United States could still change its position and recommends how other member countries should press it to do so.

Over the past few years, it has become apparent that a small number of technology companies have assembled detailed datasets on the characteristics, preferences, and behavior of billions of individuals. This concentration of data is at the root of a worrying power imbalance between dominant internet firms and the rest of society, reflecting negatively on collective security, consumer rights, and competition. Introducing data sharing mandates, or requirements for market leaders to share user data with other firms and academia, would have a positive effect on competition. As data are a key input for artificial intelligence (AI), more widely available information would help spread the benefits of AI through the economy. On the other hand, data sharing could worsen existing risks to consumer privacy and collective security. Policymakers intending to implement a data sharing mandate should carefully evaluate this tradeoff.

Germany’s new National Industrial Strategy 2030, unveiled by Economy Minister Peter Altmaier in February 2019, advocates an aggressive industrial policy. Although it stays clear of the virulent economic nationalism of the 1930s and the protectionism of President Donald Trump, its tone and much of its content are unmistakably nationalist. Zettelmeyer concludes that three of Altmaier’s five proposals—attempting to further raise the German share of manufacturing, restricting non-EU imports of intermediate goods, and promoting national champions in Germany and the European Union—are bad policies. The two remaining ideas—preventing some foreign takeovers and ramping up state support for certain technologies—are somewhat easier to justify, based on either market failures or the risk of technological dependence on foreign companies susceptible to political interference. But even in these areas, the specific policies proposed may well do more harm than good.

In his presidential address to the American Economic Association in early January, Olivier Blanchard explored the costs and benefits of public debt in the current environment of low interest rates. In this Policy Brief, he first summarizes his argument; he then addresses a number of objections to his conclusions and considers the practical fiscal policy implications.

A year after President Donald Trump’s ill-advised pullout from the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement in early 2017, the remaining 11 Asian and Pacific countries agreed on a deal in spite of the absence of the United States. Renamed the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), the accord took effect on December 30, 2018, and provides rigorous, up-to-date rules for Asia-Pacific trade—but it excludes the region’s two biggest economies, the United States and China.
Petri and Plummer calculate that Chinese membership in the CPTPP would yield large economic and political benefits to China and other members. The CPTPP, in its current form, would generate global income gains estimated at $147 billion annually. If China were to join, these gains would quadruple to $632 billion, or a quarter more than in the original TPP with the United States. But to join the CPTPP, China would have to undertake unprecedented reforms and manage complex political challenges.

Major banks or financial institutions in more than 15 countries in the European Union (EU) have been hit in recent years by revelations involving violations of anti–money laundering (AML) laws. These cases have underlined the serious shortcomings of the European Union’s AML regime. AML supervision of banks and other firms rests largely with the national authorities of individual EU member states, in increasing tension with the legal framework for centralized prudential supervision within the euro area and the European single market. The system depends heavily on small, lower-capacity jurisdictions to provide the first line of defense against illicit financial practices, encouraging illicit actors to seek out weak links. The result is an erosion of supervisory effectiveness in those member states where money launderers concentrate their activity, undermining the integrity of the entire European system.
This study recommends the creation of a European AML Authority that would supervise banks, other financial institutions, and nonfinancial firms for AML purposes. The new agency should have high standards of governance and independence, publish all of its decisions, and be empowered to impose sufficiently large fines to deter malpractice.
A bitter standoff is under way between Italy’s new government and the European Commission over the Commission’s objections to Italy’s proposed expansionary budget for 2019. In this Policy Brief, the authors look at the merits of fiscal expansion, concluding that Italy’s budget is unlikely to stimulate growth and may well depress it. But they argue that the budget is not likely to have a dramatic impact on fiscal solvency. Absent a significant recession, Italy’s debt-to-GDP ratio of over 130 percent will be roughly unchanged in the next few years. To reduce its debt-to-GDP ratio, Italy will need to offset its fiscal expansion eventually, an adjustment that seems feasible. The analysis in this Policy Brief has two main policy implications. First, Italy would have fared better with a roughly fiscally neutral budget, which would have led to lower interest rates and probably to higher growth and employment while still allowing the government to pursue some of its social objectives. Second, even if the government decides to stick to its deficit plan, a crisis is not a foregone conclusion. At current government bond spreads, and in the absence of additional shocks to output, the government can probably achieve some of its goals and maintain debt sustainability. But further doubts, triggered by unrealistic claims or budgetary slippages, could lead to unmanageable spreads and a serious crisis, including involuntary exit from the eurozone.

President Donald Trump has long made clear his disdain for the World Trade Organization (WTO) and has reportedly often stated his desire to pull the United States out of the organization. Given that the president withdrew the United States from the Trans-Pacific Partnership and repeatedly threatened to withdraw from the North American Free Trade Agreement, merely floating the idea that the United States would pull out of the WTO has set off alarm bells in Washington and around the world. Before Trump became president, a US withdrawal from the WTO had never been considered within the realm of possibility. It now raises several important questions. Bown and Irwin address two of them: First, what would be the consequences for US tariffs if the United States withdrew from the WTO? Second, does the president have the legal authority to pull the United States out of the organization and impose higher tariffs without congressional approval? A decision by President Trump to withdraw the United States from the WTO—if deemed legal under US law—could deal a disastrous blow to America’s foreign trade and would likely cripple an organization that has helped foster peaceful commercial relations for over seven decades.

The amended Korea-US Free Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA)—quickly negotiated and signed in September 2018—involves only limited changes to the original pact. Schott and Jung assess what was changed as a result of the negotiations and, importantly, what was left off the agenda. The revised deal rectifies problems with Korean implementation of KORUS obligations, revises Korean auto regulations, and extends US import protection for trucks but does not address agricultural issues or rules of origin for autos and parts. On balance, the modest revisions will restrict, not enlarge, bilateral trade. While it has reduced short-term trade friction between Seoul and Washington, the KORUS amendment has not resolved the Trump administration’s fundamental concerns about bilateral trade in autos and parts. Korea remains vulnerable to new US trade protection in that sector.

The current trade war between the United States and China is a central dimension of the emerging Cold War between the two superpowers. The conflict also highlights and threatens to aggravate the contest for global economic leadership between the two countries, which ranges far beyond their disputes over trade balances and level playing fields. Bergsten analyzes the links between the immediate clash and the far more important systemic confrontation and offers three suggestions that could address the two problems simultaneously: First, China should join the current US-EU and US-EU-Japan initiatives to reform the rules of the World Trade Organization to effectively address the systemic issues central to the present trade conflict. Second, China should indicate an interest in joining the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, which probably would induce the United States to rejoin the arrangement and provide another venue to open markets and write new rules. Third, the United States and China should work together to reform the International Monetary Fund to shore up its financial resources and amend its governance structure to better reflect the evolving balance of international economic power.

This Policy Brief surveys and evaluates the recent debate on euro area safe assets by comparing a proposal to create sovereign bond–backed securities (SBBS) with a broad set of alternatives—some with an extensive history, others very recent. It reaches two main conclusions. First, SBBS mostly do not deserve the criticism that they have attracted. Indeed, they do well compared to most alternatives. At the same time, some of these alternatives could be superior in some respects. These include the widely discussed option to issue common euro area bonds financed by member state contributions or a common tax, in addition to less well-known proposals, such as the idea to create a senior, publicly-owned financial intermediary that would issue a euro area bond backed by a diversified portfolio of sovereign debt purchased at face value (“E-bonds”).
However, none of the alternatives surveyed in this paper dominates SBBS entirely. Common euro area bonds financed by member state contributions, a common tax, or the proceeds of a sovereign wealth fund would require new revenue commitments, new institutions, or both. E-bonds would require some public money and would lead to some, albeit limited, redistribution across member states. They would also have a greater impact on national bond markets. That said, E-bonds are a serious alternative to SBBS that deserve a more thorough evaluation.

This Policy Brief draws on the literature measuring the effects of quantitative easing (QE) as well as the historical experience in implementing QE to lay out a simple strategy for how to use QE. It makes a proposal that arguably transitions most effectively from the interest rate adjustment process that central banks have employed with their primary policy instrument and shares many of the desirable properties of traditional monetary policy.
In particular, central banks should characterize QE in terms of the stock of long-term asset holdings and should announce purchases of assets in discrete increments that are designed to deliver macroeconomic stimulus equivalent to the policy rate cut that they would otherwise desire to implement. For the United States and some other countries, research suggests that a purchase of long-term bonds equivalent to 1.5 percent of GDP has a stimulative effect roughly equal to a cut in the policy rate of 0.25 percentage point.
Moreover, central banks should convey that these adjustments will be made under a policy approach that responds routinely to economic developments and displays considerable inertia, as has typically been the case with the conventional policy interest rate.

Pellet presents evidence that the tax law passed in 2017 will affect the present discounted value of after-tax corporate profits with significant differences across sectors. Sectors that previously had high effective tax rates, low leverage, low capital expenditures, and low foreign exposure are poised to benefit from the new tax law with stock price increases of close to 10 percent—two to three times more than the aggregate S&P 500. The new tax law is negative on net for some sectors—real estate, information technology, and utilities—because the reduction in statutory rates for sectors with already low effective tax rates will be more than offset by the tax base expansion.

The Trump administration’s willingness to violate trade rules to maximize its negotiating leverage is undermining its most important and most legitimate objective in international trade and investment: persuading China to reform its problematic economic system, in which foreign firms are discriminated against in high-tech projects. The administration could have dealt with the problems posed by China through measures that would have been consistent with preserving the rules-based trading system rather than threatening it with destruction. Instead of confronting China with unilateral actions, the administration should be working with its allies to put pressure on China to conform to World Trade Organization rules where these are applicable. But the administration’s actions, coupled with China’s retaliations, have so far been counterproductive. And overall they have weakened adherence to rules and norms that have contributed to the success of the global trading and investment system.

President Donald Trump’s proposal in May to impose 25 percent tariffs on imported automobiles, SUVs, vans, trucks—as well as all auto parts—will raise car prices significantly, suppressing sales and pushing some buyers with modest incomes out of the new car market entirely. Using industry data, consumer information, and the record of previous tariff hikes, the authors estimate that the average price of an entry-level compact car will increase between $1,408 and $2,057. Similarly, the price of a new compact SUV/crossover, the most popular vehicle in America, will rise by $2,093 to $3,066. More upscale versions of the compact SUV/crossover will rise by significantly more, $4,708 to $6,972.

Over the past three years, the European Union has sought various ways to curb tax avoidance practices and collect more revenue from an array of US multinational corporations (MNCs), triggering disputes with some of the giants in the field. Now the European Commission is looking to tax MNCs’ digital earnings. It has proposed a digital services tax (DST), which would tax the part of a digital firm’s revenues attributed to European member states, and a digital profits tax, which would tax the slice of corporate profits derived in member states. These new tax proposals arise in a general European atmosphere of distrust towards highly successful US firms, exemplified by attacks on US digital firms over privacy issues and concerns that tech giants may be defying EU competition policy standards. Many US MNCs in the digital industry, such as Google and Facebook, may be subject to the proposed taxes. Hufbauer and Lu argue that the DST has the characteristics of a prohibited tariff under the rules of the World Trade Organization. They suggest several countermeasures the United States could pursue if the European Union moves forward with implementing the DST.
No government has a more ambitious and far-reaching plan to harness the power of data to change the way it governs than the Chinese government. Its Social Credit System (SCS), laid out in a plan released in 2014 and still under construction, aims to extend financial credit scoring systems—commonly used by financial institutions in the United States—to other areas of government regulation, from contract enforcement to food safety, corruption, and environmental protection. The plan is to link public and private data on financial and social behavior across China, use the data to evaluate behavior of individuals and organizations, and punish or reward them according to certain agreed upon standards of appropriate conduct. While many of the SCS goals are laudable, the scale and potential impact pose serious risks to individuals and organizations that could result in the opposite of the promised effects. There is still time to shape the SCS to become an effective tool to deal with some of China’s most intractable domestic problems and at the same time minimize the odds of it becoming an Orwellian system of social control.

At the core of the Trump administration’s dispute with China lies a real problem—China’s persistent misappropriation of foreign technology. The administration has repeatedly threatened a strategy of broad-based retaliation that will arguably cause US firms and workers more economic pain than the Chinese behavior that US trade negotiators are seeking to change. Instead of indiscriminate tariffs, carefully targeted sanctions should be imposed on the Chinese entities directly involved in technology misappropriation. This Policy Brief proposes a new structure, based on a current bill with bipartisan support in Congress, that can equip policymakers with the data they need to impose target sanctions, outlines existing policy tools they can use, and points to ways to engage Western allies in taking this more targeted approach.

The Trump administration’s Section 301 tariffs are an ineffective response to US concerns about China’s high-technology aspirations. They are a prime example of 20th century tools aimed at the knowledge-embodying trade flows of the 21st century. Instead, these tariffs disadvantage American producers and harm US allies operating in East Asia while missing the mark on penalizing Chinese domestic firms that may have misappropriated US and other advanced economies’ technologies.

The mechanics of US withdrawal from the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) have been widely explored, with an emerging consensus among legal experts that President Donald Trump does have the authority to pull out of the accord. This Policy Brief examines the legal procedures in Canada and Mexico in the event that either country decides to withdraw or terminate NAFTA. Relative to the United States, Canada and Mexico have clearer legal procedures. To terminate NAFTA in Canada, the Department of International Trade would send the notice to withdrawal upon approval by the Cabinet and the Order in Council. In Mexico, the president can notify withdrawal from NAFTA under Article 2205, following Senate approval. To raise tariffs to the MFN level, Canada requires amendment of federal statutes that requires passage in both chambers of the Parliament through regular procedures. To raise its tariffs, Mexico requires a bill to amend federal legislation that has the approval of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies.
While the legal powers to withdraw from NAFTA commitments are very broad in all three partner countries, political and economic constraints greatly narrow the scope of action. Canada conducts about 64 percent of its two-way merchandise trade with the United States; the figure for Mexico is 63 percent; and the United States depends on Canada and Mexico for 29 percent of its global commerce.

Greece’s debt currently stands at close to €330 billion, over 180 percent of GDP, with almost 70 percent owed to European official creditors. The fact that Greece’s public debts must be restructured is by now widely accepted. What remains controversial, however, is the extent of debt relief needed to make Greece’s debt sustainable.
This Policy Brief argues that the debt relief measures outlined by the Eurogroup will not be sufficient to restore the sustainability of Greece’s debt. At the same time it shows that Greece’s debt sustainability can in fact be restored without aggravating moral hazard—i.e., encouraging future governments in Greece and elsewhere in the euro area to take risks in the belief that they will be bailed out—and within the framework of EU law, in particular Article 125 of the Lisbon Treaty, which prohibits EU members from assuming liability for the debts of other members.
It concludes that only conditional face value debt relief, in combination with the measures already considered by the Eurogroup, would restore Greece’s debt sustainability with reasonable confidence. Furthermore, if the debt relief is structured in a way that creates incentives for additional fiscal adjustment, as proposed in this Brief, the amount of face value debt relief required could be modest—on the order of 10 to 15 percent of the outstanding official debt.

Once again, the United States and other members of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) have been asked to address the adequacy of IMF financial resources and the distribution of voting power in the Fund. Observers are justified in thinking that they just witnessed this drama. IMF members completed an agreement on the size of IMF quota resources and governance—or voting power—reform in November 2010. As part of that agreement on the 14th general review of IMF quotas, members committed to bring forward the completion of the 15th general review of quotas to January 2014. The target was not met because the United States delayed approving the 2010 agreement until December 2015, which was necessary for the implementation of the 14th review. As a result, in December 2016, the governors of the IMF freshly resolved to complete the 15th review by the spring of 2019 or the fall of 2019 at the latest.
Consequently, the US administration must develop a position on the 15th general review in the next several months. This Policy Brief argues that the United States should support a significant increase in IMF quotas and further reform of IMF governance through the redistribution of IMF quota shares and, therefore, voting shares. At a minimum, total IMF quotas and the standing New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB) should be increased by enough to replace the roughly $450 billion in ad hoc bilateral borrowing arrangements that expire in 2020. This would leave the Fund’s current lending capacity essentially unchanged for the next decade.

The fraught negotiations over revising the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) have focused largely on US demands to limit imports from Canada and Mexico. But one little discussed step could help the United States increase exports to Canada and Mexico in a way the Trump administration ought to support. US express shipments to its NAFTA partners are far below potential, partly due to what are called low de minimis thresholds in those countries. The de minimis threshold refers to the value of imported goods below which no duty or tax is collected, and the customs declaration is very simple.
This Policy Brief reviews the very low de minimis thresholds in Canada and Mexico and argues that substantial room exists for the expansion of express shipments within North America. Under the assumption that express shipments from the United States to Canada and Mexico could exhibit the same relationship to likely household buyers as found in the United States, the share of actual low-value shipments to Canada and Mexico is far below potential. US low-value shipments to Canada and Mexico could potentially increase to about $34 billion annually but have reached less than half that level. The gap suggests that higher de minimis thresholds could boost US exports of low-valued goods and improve consumer choice in Canada and Mexico.

Many countries have squandered their natural resource endowments. The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank routinely hector developing economies to save and invest more of their revenues from resources such as oil and gold for the benefit of future generations after the resources run out. But, can a country save too much of its resource revenues? Gagnon argues that since the first capital transfers to its Government Pension Fund Global in 1996, Norway has saved more than was needed to raise consumption of all generations equally. Norway’s excess saving imposes a cost on the rest of the world during periods of weak aggregate demand and ultralow interest rates. Gagnon proposes a counterfactual saving policy that would have increased Norway’s household consumption by nearly 9 percent on average from 1996 through 2017. The proposed policy would have reduced Norway’s current account surplus by more than one-third, or $13 billion per year on average, from 1996 through 2017. Even now, Norway could raise current consumption by more than US$2,000 per capita, while keeping the contribution of oil wealth to future generations equally large.

President Trump has asserted that trade balances are a key measure of a nation’s commercial success and that large US trade deficits prove that past trade approaches have been flawed. But trade deficits are not in fact a good measure of how well a country is doing with respect to its trade policies. Many of the assumptions on which the administration’s beliefs rest are not supported by the evidence. This Policy Brief argues that trade deficits are not necessarily bad, do not necessarily cost jobs or reduce growth, and are not a measure of whether foreign trade policies or agreements with other countries are fair or unfair. Efforts to use trade policy and agreements to reduce either bilateral or overall trade deficits are also unlikely to produce the effects the administration claims they will and instead lead to friction with US trading partners, harming the people the policies claim to help.

Since its inception in 1995, the World Trade Organization’s (WTO) dispute settlement mechanism has resolved an impressive number of trade disputes and has earned a reputation as the “crown jewel” of the global trading system. Today, however, the mechanism is in crisis. WTO members have failed to negotiate updates to the rulebook, including rules on dispute settlement itself. As a result, the WTO Appellate Body increasingly is asked to render decisions on ambiguous or incomplete WTO rules. Its interpretations of such provisions have provoked charges by the United States and others that binding Appellate Body rulings, which establish precedents for future cases, effectively circumvent the prerogative of member countries to revise the WTO rulebook and thus undercut the national sovereignty of WTO members. For the past few years, US officials have blocked appointments of Appellate Body members to force WTO members to negotiate new rules that address US concerns and limit the scope for judicial overreach. If this problem is not resolved, the Appellate Body soon will not have enough members to review cases and the vaunted WTO dispute settlement system will grind to a halt.
Immediately following the US presidential election in November 2016, many economists were concerned that increased uncertainty over economic policy would lead to a decline in the US stock market. From the time of the election to the end of 2017, however, the stock market, as measured by the Standard and Poor's (S&P) 500 index, increased by about 25 percent. Price swings since then have led investors and economists to increasingly ask: Was the stock market rise justified by an increase in actual and expected future dividends, or did it reflect unhealthy price developments, which may reverse in the future?
This Policy Brief examines the movement of stock market prices from the time of the election to the end of 2017. It concludes that a bit more than one half of the run-up in the S&P 500 can be explained by an increase in actual and expected dividends. The effects of the perceived probability that a corporate tax cut bill would pass Congress account for 2 to 6 percentage points of this increase. The rest can be attributed to a decrease of less than 100 basis points in the equity premium, a decrease that leaves it roughly equal to where it was in the mid-2000s. Lower uncertainty in the rest of the world, in particular in Europe, more than offset the higher policy uncertainty in the United States following the 2016 presidential election and can plausibly justify this decrease in the equity premium.

The centerpiece of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) of 2017 is the reduction in the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent. The Joint Committee on Taxation has estimated the net revenue loss from the tax overhaul at $1 trillion over the next decade. The underlying premise of the legislation is that lower corporate taxes will spur growth, with trickle-down wage benefits that spread the resulting economic gains.
This approach, however, risks increasing inequality in income distribution, potentially leaving those in the lower income groups worse off than before. Two factors contribute to this risk. First, the personal tax cuts expire after 2025 whereas the corporate tax cuts are permanent. Second, there will be a sizable loss of revenue, and compensating cuts in federal expenditures could wind up being concentrated on benefits received by lower-income groups.
This Brief uses the estimates of the congressional Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT) to examine the distributional impact of the new tax law. It then considers the further changes that would occur if there were regressive expenditure cuts applied to make up for the revenue loss (as illustrated using the distributional profile of Medicaid spending). The broad result is that the direct effect of the legislation on income inequality is relatively minor, but the overall effect could be much more unequal if induced spending cuts were concentrated on programs oriented toward low-income groups.

New challenges facing the European Union—immigration pressures, the need to decrease security dependence on an increasingly erratic United States, and the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union (Brexit)—are compelling EU leaders to consider overhauling the revenue side of the European Union’s existing budget. To deal with these challenges in the future, the European Union will need resources—at a time when Europeans are increasingly skeptical about the effectiveness of budget-making in Brussels. Longstanding US budgetary procedures of trust fund accounting and earmarking government revenue towards specific priorities can provide a template for European policymakers. Shifting the EU budget towards more earmarked resources would reduce distrust among taxpayers by limiting Brussels’ spending discretion while focusing expenditures on specific challenges facing the European project.

Formidable barriers stand between the modern financial system and the hundreds of millions of Chinese citizens still using costly informal credit. For many, the financial data that could be used to give them a credit score that would lead to a fair priced loan exist but are not being used. This analysis finds that the most difficult barriers cutting these data off from their potential use for greater financial inclusion are the legal and political restrictions on data sharing and use, economic and competitive concerns from data holders, and the technical difficulty of integrating disparate systems. Policies that encourage coordination between public authorities and private actors in finance and technology can go a long way towards making these data available and driving access to credit in China. This shift would not only help borrowers: It would also encourage the needed economic rebalancing towards consumption, increase competition in the financial sector, raise efficiency through better credit allocation, and contribute to sustainable economic growth and social welfare.

The early boost to the dollar following President Donald Trump's election—a Trump "bump"—has been replaced by a Trump "dump." The real effective exchange rate (REER) for the US dollar fell by 6.3 percent from its monthly peak in December 2016 to the October base period used in this study. As a consequence, whereas the dollar was overvalued against its FEER by 8 percent in May, its overvaluation has narrowed to about 4 percent. Through mid-May the dollar's decline could be explained by changes in interest differentials against other major currencies, but thereafter a growing gap emerged in an apparent reflection of increased US political risk, from both domestic political dysfunction (with the failure to repeal the Affordable Care Act) and escalating tension with North Korea. A weaker dollar should help curb the widening of the US trade deficit and potential associated escalation of trade conflict. Cline also evaluates congressional tax reform proposals and estimates the magnitude of the revenue loss as likely to be in the range of 1 percent of GDP annually or less, which suggests that the scope for an upsurge in the dollar from tax reform may be modest rather than massive.
Cline will continue releasing updates to his series on fundamental equilibrium exchange rate (FEER) estimates at the website Economics International Inc. Please contact him at [email protected] for more information.

Proponents of lowering corporate taxes cite an estimate by the Trump administration’s Council of Economic Advisers (CEA) that cutting the corporate tax rate from 35 to 20 percent would raise average annual household income by $4,000 to $9,000, corresponding to an increase in wages ranging from 6 to 14 percent, respectively. The council’s conclusion is based on cross-country and cross-state statistical tests and are subject to weaknesses highlighted by Lawrence Summers and Jason Furman, among others. In contrast, Gregory Mankiw has pointed out that a simple aggregate production function approach could generate wage increases that substantially exceed the tax revenue loss. This Policy Brief examines the use of the production function approach and concludes that although Mankiw provides a useful reminder that a corporate tax cut could raise worker productivity and wages through its potential for providing more capital for labor to work with, the likely magnitudes of the gains are far smaller than the range claimed by the CEA.

In this comparative analysis of tax systems in advanced and large emerging economies, the United States stands out as an anomaly. Over the past 30 years the average corporate income tax rate in the 46 countries studied has fallen to about 20 to 25 percent, nearly every country has introduced carbon taxes, and personal income taxes have stabilized around 35 to 45 percent. By contrast, the US tax system relies primarily on high direct personal and corporate taxes and has no value-added tax (VAT) or carbon tax. The US Congress should cut the corporate tax rate by 10 to 15 percentage points, to reach the OECD average and boost US competitiveness. Lawmakers can further consider a shift to indirect taxes like the VAT, to make up for revenues that would be lost under a reduced corporate tax rate.

Market income inequality, calculated before government taxes and transfers, in the United States is not noticeably higher than in many other advanced economies, including those in continental Europe. Disposable income inequality, after taxes and transfers, however, is higher in the United States than in other members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) because of how it distributes government transfers and collects tax revenue to finance its general government. The evidence gathered from this global study of taxes concludes that the combination of the US tax code and the US system of transfer payments to low-income American families constitutes the least redistributive transfer and tax system in the OECD. Inequality and redistribution questions should always be at the center of current debates about government transfers but also when the discussion is about overhauling the federal tax code.

A balanced, broad-based economic recovery seems under way in all major regions of the world. Managing the recovery poses challenges in the short run but they appear relatively benign. Looking forward, however, the authors see a set of new risks: (1) Partly because of the crisis and partly because of subsequent low growth, public debt has reached postwar historical highs in many advanced countries; (2) productivity growth, and with it potential growth, has declined. Whether it remains low or picks up in the future is uncertain; (3) interest rates are expected to increase from their current low levels. By how much and at what pace is—again—uncertain; and (4) many advanced countries have strong populist movements (or even populist leaders) espousing risky macroeconomic policies. The authors warn that rising interest rates, combined with low growth, high debt, and populist pressure, would be a recipe for fiscal crises.

Labor productivity in the United States has been dismal for more than a decade. But productivity slowdowns are nothing new in the United States, and, like all its predecessors, the current slowdown will also come to an end as a new productivity revival takes hold. Four developments have the potential to contribute to faster productivity growth in the United States: improvements in the healthcare system, the increasing use of robots, a revolution in e-learning, and the globalization of invention. The authors gauge the potential productivity impact of these developments and suggest that US labor productivity growth would likely rise from the 0.5 percent average rate registered since 2010 to a pace of 2 percent or more. This outcome is more likely to depend on a supportive policy environment. The federal government should expand its support of basic scientific research; allow more immigration by highly skilled scientists, engineers, and entrepreneurs; and preserve America’s longstanding commitment to open trade and investment policies. It should also strengthen the safety net rather than pare back support for workers displaced by the innovations that will drive future productivity growth. If they avoid policy errors, President Trump or his successor could have the good fortune of presiding over a productivity revival.
After promising last year to terminate US participation in the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), President Donald Trump has opted for renegotiation in several areas, including in the “rules of origin” chapter. Caroline Freund examines those rules of origin to determine whether they need to be tightened to prevent foreign goods from using NAFTA trade preferences or loosened to improve efficiency. Freund finds NAFTA rules of origin are strict and highly complex, as compared with rules in other free trade agreements. Tightening them could perversely lead to lower regional content in final goods and disrupt regional supply chains, as more importers eschew NAFTA preferences because of costly rules of origin and instead trade under standard most favored nation tariffs. Given the complexity of the NAFTA rules of origin, Freund argues in favor of streamlining rules, with regional content requirements for all goods set at one rate, as opposed to the current product-by-product rules in NAFTA.

Despite agriculture’s modest contribution to GDP in all three partner countries, agricultural issues will be a thorny aspect of the NAFTA renegotiation—just as they are in other trade agreement negotiations. US and Canadian agricultural producers like NAFTA and will fight hard to preserve it. Aside from some wrangling over market access issues for dairy, poultry, and eggs and recent spats over Canadian soft lumber, farm organizations in both countries view NAFTA positively. Public opinion in Mexico is more ambivalent, but NAFTA has created strong export-oriented agricultural interests in the country’s north that balance more protectionist interests in the south. NAFTA has created complex cross-border agricultural supply chains that create value added for the US economy, particularly in GOP-leaning states. Disrupting NAFTA could create big problems for Trump-voting states and states with GOP and split Senate delegations, especially those that rely heavily on agricultural exports and intra-NAFTA trade.

The Trump administration’s strategy toward trade agreements in general, and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in particular, is fundamentally misplaced for two reasons: (1) its apparent desire to use trade policy rather than macroeconomic policy including exchange rate policy to reduce trade imbalances and (2) its focus on the bilateral rather than global scope of those imbalances. Bergsten outlines the dangerous and self-defeating implications for the negotiation of such an unusual approach. Accordingly, provisions that could be included in the agreement to pursue that purpose are not likely to be feasible.

Previous US administrations—whether Republican or Democrat—have focused on reducing barriers to trade and investment during trade negotiations, but the Trump administration will prioritize reducing the US trade deficit when it renegotiates the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Trump will seek to lower Canadian barriers to US exports and oppose changes that would lower US barriers to Canadian exports. The authors identify well-known US and Canadian trade barriers and speculate on possible “blockbuster” demands that the Trump trade team might make on Canada in keeping with Trump’s concept of unfair trade (e.g., border tax adjustment, rules of origin, and currency undervaluation). NAFTA renegotiation gives the Trump administration an opportunity to resolve longstanding trade grievances with Canada, provided the United States makes its own concessions. Both countries can benefit from updating NAFTA to address issues not foreseen in the early 1990s, such as digital commerce and state-owned enterprises. But US insistence on “blockbuster” demands could put not only the talks but also the entire relationship between Ottawa and Washington at risk.

The Trump administration has quickly adopted an aggressive and antagonistic approach to using US trade laws as a protectionist tool. The effect on trade relations may not be as immediately disruptive as if Trump had followed through on campaign threats to pull the United States out of the North American Free Trade Agreement or impose 45 percent tariffs on China. However, the escalating trade barriers and the means through which the Trump administration is motivating their use have the potential to severely weaken the rules-based trading system. Rather than blowing it up by simply withdrawing, the end result of the Trump administration's tactics may be that the World Trade Organization implodes from within.

Among the most significant creations of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act was a Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), aimed at improving coordination among US regulators to ensure a more holistic view of dangers to the financial system. Seven years later and especially since the 2016 US election, FSOC faces political pressure from elements of the private sector and their advocates in Washington. One legislative proposal would retroactively repeal virtually all of FSOC's substantive authorities. The authors warn that abandoning, undermining, or curtailing the powers of FSOC would increase the risks of another major financial crisis—on the scale of what happened in 2008 or worse. No one can predict the precise nature or timing of the next crisis, but FSOC is the United States' best and likely only guardian against systemic collapse. It must be preserved, protected, and even strengthened. FSOC leadership must carry out with vigor the core mandate of identifying risks to the financial stability of the United States.

The latest estimates of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs) find the most important currency misalignment is that of the US dollar, which remains overvalued by the same amount as in November 2016, about 8 percent. The political and monetary forces presently affecting exchange rates shows considerable risk that the dollar will rise further. Upward pressure on the dollar seems likely to persist as the United States moves toward monetary normalization on a faster track than the euro area and Japan, leading to rising interest differentials that could be exacerbated by a move toward major US fiscal stimulus. The tax reform plan outlined by the Trump administration at the end of April could cause such a stimulus, considering that it would cut revenues by about 2 percent of GDP. Even achieving the steady 3 percent growth envisioned by the tax proposal authors would be unlikely to recover more than about one-third to one-half of the direct revenue loss. If fiscal reform adopted the border tax adjustment proposed by House Republicans, the deficits might be somewhat smaller, but there could be a sizable exchange market shock strengthening the dollar.
Cline will continue releasing updates to his series on FEER estimates at the website Economics International Inc. Please contact him at [email protected] for more information.

European policymakers and analysts often appear to assume that most euro area banks are publicly listed companies with ownership scattered among many institutional investors, a structure in which no single shareholder has controlling influence and that allows for considerable flexibility to raise capital when needed. Such an ownership structure is indeed prevalent among banks in advanced countries such as Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Veron shows, however, that listed banks with dispersed ownership are the exception rather than the rule among the euro area’s significant banks, especially if one looks beyond the very largest banking groups. The bulk of these significant banks are government-owned or cooperatives, or uniquely influenced by one or several large shareholders, or otherwise prone to direct political influence. As a result, the public transparency of many banks is low, with correspondingly low market discipline; they have weak incentives to prioritize profitability; their ability to shore up their balance sheets through either retained earnings or external capital raising is limited, resulting in insufficient capital flexibility; they take unnecessary risks due to political interference; and their links with governments perpetuate the vicious circle between banks and sovereigns, which has been a key driver of the euro area crisis.

In March, UK Prime Minister Theresa May formally initiated a two-year negotiation period for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union under the EU Treaty’s Article 50. Since the June 2016 Brexit referendum, she has missed several good opportunities to generate the necessary political goodwill across the EU-27 and is now running out of time as the EU-27 impose their priorities on the Article 50 negotiations, one of which is settling the UK immigration status of EU workers. One way the prime minister could generate goodwill would be to unilaterally announce that her government will grant all EU citizens living in the United Kingdom full UK citizenship, except voting rights. Such a status would be a UK equivalent of a US green card. Under such a step, EU-27 citizens would acquire all the essential auxiliary rights already possessed by UK citizens, including work and residency permissions and family-based migration. The EU-27 will almost certainly reciprocate such a British gesture, smoothing the way for successful Brexit negotiations.

Hufbauer and Lu, updating a landmark PIIE study made in 2005, calculate the payoff to the United States from trade expansion from 1950 to 2016 at $2.1 trillion. The payoff has stemmed from trade expansion resulting from policy liberalization and improved transportation and communications technology. The sum translates into an increase of $7,014 in GDP per capita and $18,131 in GDP per household. The potential gains from future policy liberalization could be as large as $540 billion for the United States by the year 2025, or an increase of $1,670 in GDP per capita and $4,400 in GDP per household. On the other hand, 156,250 manufacturing sector jobs were lost annually over the past 13 years, representing less than a percent of the number of people involuntary separated from their jobs each year. A more generous unemployment insurance program and expanded tax credits would help displaced workers adjust, the authors argue, while preserving the large gains resulting from trade expansion.
This paper examines how G-7 cooperation can be maintained in the Trump era. Its working assumption is that the US administration will remain open to international cooperation in principle and yet be constrained by Trump’s economic nationalism and specific campaign promises, such as reducing trade imbalances. The main finding is that useful areas for G-7 macroeconomic, trade, and financial cooperation continue to exist even after taking US constraints into account. At the same time, leaders of the other countries need to be prepared to proceed on their own if attempts to convince the US administration that G-7 economic cooperation is in the interests of all members fail.
This paper is a slightly revised and updated version of a paper presented at a conference on "Major Challenges for Global Macroeconomic Stability: The Role of the G7" organized by the Istituto Affari Internazionali (IAI) in Rome, Italy on March 27–28, 2017.  

At 35 percent, the United States has the highest statutory corporate income tax rate among advanced economies, and this high rate coexists with a number of large preferences and exceptions. Reform of the widely criticized corporate tax is among the top agenda items of the Trump administration and the Republican leadership of Congress, and even many Democrats say the time has come to revamp the tax to make US-based multinational corporations more competitive in the global economy. Djankov analyzes episodes of tax rate cuts in other advanced economies and finds that radical corporate tax cuts, of 15 or more percentage points, are rare, but modest cuts of about 10 percentage points are possible in normal economic conditions and practical to implement as they do not trigger large fiscal imbalances. He concludes that a US corporate income tax cut of 10 to 15 percentage points—from 35 percent to 20 to 25 percent at the federal level—would bring the US rate in line with the average rate (23 percent) among other advanced economies. 

Bitcoin is the first digital currency to have received widespread recognition and interest from users, developers, investors, central banks, and regulators, largely because of its “distributed ledger” technology, which allows it to provide relatively low-cost peer-to-peer transfers of money. Users own the bitcoin system and can make changes to the rules and protocol only by consensus or a supermajority of 95 percent. This communitarian ownership model and the fact that payments in bitcoin can be easily made from one end of the globe to another have led many to believe and hope that bitcoin will one day replace sovereign currencies—and the central banks that issue them. In addition, some observers see bitcoin as the origin of a fundamental transformation of the financial system toward a more decentralized structure. As a medium of exchange, bitcoin is still small compared with traditional channels, and it is held largely for speculation rather than transactions. Its lack of a mechanism for dampening the price effect of an increase in demand or reducing supply in case of a demand slump means that adopting bitcoin as a currency would be like reverting to a currency based on gold coins. As long as central banks continue to pursue stability-oriented monetary policies, they will have little reason to fear that the bitcoin system will replace them. 

The Financial Stability Board (FSB) has helped strengthen international financial regulatory standards, and as a result, the global economy—and hence the US economy—is more resilient and better able to support strong, sustainable, and balanced growth. The FSB has provided a framework to encourage other jurisdictions to toughen their regulatory regimes in line with steps taken in the United States. The FSB, however, does not have a perfect track record. Sheets suggests several areas where the governance, transparency, and the work program of the FSB could be improved. He argues that supporters of the FSB's work need to do a better job of presenting the case for international cooperation and showcasing the FSB's accomplishments. The United States has played a leadership role in the FSB since the group’s inception, and important benefits have flowed to the US economy as a result. If it fails to maintain its leadership position, he warns, other countries will step in to fill the vacuum, resulting in rules and practices in the global economy and financial system that evolve in directions that are inconsistent with US national interests.

A major economic concern with the border tax adjustment blueprint, which House Speaker Paul Ryan and House Ways and Means Committee chair Kevin Brady support, is its potential to reduce US imports and promote US exports in a way that could violate international trade rules. Because of the size of the US economy, the trade distortions resulting from the tax would punish US trading partners, putting pressure on them to retaliate immediately. World Trade Organization (WTO) rules establish a framework for understanding how trading partners' policy response to a US tax reform would proceed. The potential retaliatory costs to US exporters associated with elements of the Ryan-Brady blueprint could be large. If the reform is found to violate WTO rules by restricting US imports, trading partners could be authorized to retaliate by an estimated $220 billion annually. If the new US tax is found to implicitly subsidize exports, partners could be authorized to retaliate by an additional $165 billion annually. The United States would face some of this combined $385 billion in retaliation almost immediately upon implementing the tax, through the imposition of countervailing duties by trading partners.  Any durable overhaul of the US tax system requires a frank airing and honest empirical assessment of the international implications of the policy. It is best to tackle the issue with a strong US commitment to international engagement and cooperation with trading partners.

The financial crisis of 2007–09 wreaked worldwide havoc because of the interconnectedness of many countries’ economies and financial systems. To contain and stabilize these interwoven global financial systems and avert future crises thus requires international cooperation, preferably with American leadership. The Trump administration’s policies on these matters are unclear. But early indications are cause for concern over future US commitment to international regulations to prevent and manage the inevitable occurrence of future crises.

In March 2017 the UK government will formally begin the process of ending its membership in the European Union. According to estimates presented in this Policy Brief, the direct negative effect of Brexit on the financial sector in the City of London will be a 12 to 18 percent loss of revenue and a 7 to 8 percent drop in employment, clearly significant effects. The UK government may revisit some of its financial regulation in an effort to bring in more investment. Djankov warns that such a policy move may trigger a regulatory race with other major financial markets, harming the global financial system. In the meantime, uncertainty surrounding the transition from the European Union and the possible changes in the UK government’s regulatory stance will deter new business. The biggest uncertainty, however, is whether the UK government will be able to deliver on the various promises made with Brexit: Can corporate taxes be reduced without jeopardizing the fiscal outlook? Can immigration reform maintain the flow of talent to the City of London and to UK universities and companies? Can reforms of executive pay and transparency in corporate decision making be implemented without making the United Kingdom less attractive to foreign investors? So far there is little sense of how any of these changes will take place.

As a consequence of Britain’s exit from the European Union, UK-based financial firms are expected to lose their regulatory passport to do direct business with their clients in the EU-27. Brexit will lead to a partial migration of financial services activities from London to locations in the EU-27 to continue serving their customers there. Other London-based activities might also be relocated to non-European jurisdictions, primarily the United States. This Policy Brief focuses on the implications of Brexit for the EU-27 financial system. The authors estimate that about €1.8 trillion (or 17 percent) of all UK banking assets might be on the move as a direct consequence of Brexit. Market fragmentation—if the EU-27 receives the UK business as 27 separate jurisdictions as opposed to one single financial space—would increase borrowing costs for corporations and households, compared with an integrated market for the EU-27. Different countries and cities will naturally compete for business moving out of London. EU-27 leaders need to set clear objectives for reshaping the post-Brexit financial system. The authors recommend enhancing the role of the European Securities and Markets Authority, strengthening the banking union, and improving oversight of the EU-27’s financial system infrastructure.

As promised throughout the campaign, one of the first acts carried out by President Donald Trump was to order the US Trade Representative to withdraw formally from the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)—a megaregional trade agreement between the United States and 11 other countries. The administration instead plans to pursue new bilateral trade pacts in the Asia-Pacific region. Schott explains why a regional deal like the TPP is far more likely to yield larger US gains with fewer US concessions than the administration’s favored bilateral approach. He reexamines the TPP deal and recommends ways it could be improved, including by adding enforceable currency manipulation provisions to the main trade deal and omitting the investor-state dispute settlement provision. A revamped, enlarged, and probably renamed Asia-Pacific pact that includes Korea, Colombia, and Taiwan, among others, would significantly expand the value of the original TPP deal, achieve greater regional integration, and expend less US political capital than a country-by-country bilateral approach.

Despite interest rates being very close to zero, US GDP growth has been anemic in the last four years largely due to lower optimism about the future, more speciﬁcally to downward revisions in growth forecasts, rather than legacies of the past. Put simply, demand is temporarily weak because people are adjusting to a less bright future. The authors suggest that downward revisions of productivity growth may have decreased demand by 0.5 to 1.0 percent a year since 2012. This explanation, if correct, has important implications for policy and forecasts. It may weaken the case for secular stagnation, as it suggests that the need for very low interest rates to sustain demand may be partly temporary. It also implies that, to the extent that investors in ﬁnancial markets have not fully taken this undershooting into account, the current yield curve may underestimate the strength of future demand and the need for higher interest rates in the future. The authors’ hypothesis is not an alternative to the secular stagnation hypothesis but a twist on it. They do not question that interest rates will probably be lower in the future than they were in the past but argue that, for a while, they may be undershooting their long-run value.
China launched an unprecedented wind farm construction boom a decade ago to expand renewable energy’s share of its primary energy by exploiting its considerable wind energy resources. On the surface these efforts appeared to yield great success, with China’s wind generating capacity growing more than 100-fold in less than 10 years. But close examination of its aggressive top-down approach to the promotion of renewable energy reveals that China has fallen far short of its ambitious goals. Turbines were quickly installed—but many of them were not connected to the power grid. After some turbines were connected, the state-owned enterprises that operate the national grid often refused to accept energy from them. These problems led to inefficiencies that are without precedent in the Western world. The authors find that although its installed wind energy capacity is 75 percent larger than that of the United States, China produces 14 percent less wind energy than the United States. Even in a political system with a strong centralized government, China’s push for renewable power faltered in the face of entrenched interests, weak incentives, and conflicting policy priorities.

The proposal by Speaker of the House Paul Ryan and House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Kevin Brady to replace the corporate profits tax with a 20 percent tax on cash flow with no deductibility for imports but complete deduction of exports is misguided for several reasons. First, it is protectionist, because it imposes the tax on the entirety of import value but only on the corporate profit component of domestic production, violating the concept of “like treatment” between imports and domestic goods. Second, a nonprotectionist version would involve a much lower rate and far lower revenues and, in principle, would have to vary sharply across sectors. Third, the tax would punish sectors particularly dependent on imports, especially the retail sector, automobiles, and oil refining. Fourth, the tax would be regressive, by shifting the burden to consumers and away from the holders of corporate shares with respect to the traded part of production and consumption. Fifth, the tax is unlikely to induce a fully compensating rise in the dollar against other currencies such that imports would be no more costly (and exports no more profitable) than before. Because of its protective structure, the proposal is likely to run afoul of rules against protection at the World Trade Organization, of which the United States is a signatory. Nevertheless, because the Ryan-Brady proposal continues to be a priority of Republicans in Congress, and in view of the Trump administration’s mixed signals on the proposal, it is important for the public to understand its elements and the dangers they pose.

Border tax adjustments—achieved by denying business deductions for imported goods and services and excluding exports of goods and services from the tax base—will be hotly debated as a key feature of the cash flow tax proposed in the Blueprint of House Speaker Paul Ryan and Ways and Means Committee Chair Kevin Brady. This Policy Brief examines border tax adjustments from the perspective of their compatibility with World Trade Organization (WTO) rules, their possible impact on the dollar exchange rate, and the resulting effects on tax incidence brought by exchange rate movements. The authors conclude that not only are dogmatic assertions on the WTO compatibility of BTAs unwarranted but so also are confident predictions of the induced exchange rate impact. The Trump administration and Congress will need to evaluate BTAs from different angles, realizing that decisions taken will carry the US economy into uncertain terrain.

With the election of Donald Trump and a Republican Congress, business tax reform seems a likely bet for 2017. International tax rate comparisons using a new dataset from Thomson Reuters highlight the unfavorable disparity between US corporate tax rates and practices in other advanced economies: The US actual average tax rate, calculated from the dataset at 31.1 percent—even after taking various credits, deductions, and “loopholes” into consideration—is higher than the simple average of foreign groups at 28.1 percent. Comprehensive corporate tax reform, headlined by a cut in the corporate tax rate, should be a priority for the incoming administration and Congress to spur investment and make the United States a more attractive location both for domestic and foreign investment. However, fiscal deficits associated with business tax reform, together with the stimulus to investment, will likely drive up the dollar exchange rate and increase the US trade deficit unless strong offsetting measures are part of the reform package.

Several European countries endured severe and costly banking collapses in the past decade. Central banks (both within the euro area and outside) provided extensive liquidity to keep the payments system running smoothly in most—but not all—of these countries. The policy approaches to resolve the banking crises across European countries were remarkably different, reflecting the lack of administrative and legislative preparation for bank resolution. As banking systems that had been allowed to enlarge suffered in the face of the global downturn, the scale of bank failures that swept Europe overwhelmed existing policy structures. Not all the policy choices made seem wise in retrospect; a new policy approach was clearly needed. Along with new institutional arrangements for early warning of systemic instability and a single bank supervisor in the euro area, the European Union has adopted a new policy framework for managing and resolving banking crises in euro area countries. Honohan examines the new regime, which has been in operation since the beginning of 2016, and concludes that despite improvements, more needs to be done to ensure the safety of European financial institutions and prevent future banking crises. 

China’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001 came after lengthy negotiations. More than 160 WTO member countries granted nondiscriminatory tariff treatment to China’s exporters. For its part, China agreed to carry out numerous steps to open itself to global trade and investment markets. In return for its agreement to abide by certain rules that normally govern a market economy, China was led to believe that trading partners like the United States would officially revoke its nonmarket economy status in December 2016. The battle is about to begin over whether the United States and other countries will deliver on their earlier implicit promise. This Policy Brief examines whether granting China market economy status reduces the US government’s access to special trade policies to address imports from China in a way that might result in a sudden surge in imports from China. The answer is likely no, due to a recent US policy decision to begin use of countervailing duties (CVDs) against China. Most US antidumping duties applied against China since 2007 have been accompanied by a simultaneous CVD. A change in China’s nonmarket economy status that reduced the size of applied antidumping duties may thus result in only a modest increase in imports. 

One year after the US Export-Import Bank (EXIM) was reauthorized by Congress, the debate over its future continues to rage. EXIM, meanwhile, remains hampered by lack of a three-member quorum on its Board, preventing it from approving transactions over $10 million. Currently the five-member Board has only two serving directors. The main issue in the debate is whether the Bank, which provides financing and insurance for US businesses that want to export, substitutes for the private sector or whether—as its advocates argue—it helps US companies compete in markets where private financing opportunities are scarce. This Policy Brief analyses the relationship between historical EXIM financing and export volumes and shows that EXIM lending stimulates US exports. In fact, every dollar authorized by EXIM results in $1.35 in greater exports. EXIM is not a substitute for private finance but is additive, helping US companies to be competitive in foreign markets. The Bank expands US exports, reducing the trade deficit, and returns the profits from its business to the US Treasury. Over the period studied, 2007–14, EXIM transferred more than $4 billion to the Treasury. 

As of mid-November, the US dollar has become overvalued by about 11 percent. The prospect of fiscal stimulus and associated interest rate increases under the new US administration risks still further increases in the dollar. An even stronger dollar would widen the path of growing trade deficits already in the pipeline. As President-elect Donald Trump has attributed trade deficits largely to past trade agreement “disasters,” there is a corresponding risk of escalating trade policy conflict, in a perverse dynamic reminiscent of the initial years of Reaganomics.
In October 2016, the base month of this new set of fundamental equilibrium exchange rate (FEER) estimates, the US dollar was overvalued by 8 percent, about the same amount as identified in the three previous issues in this series. The real effective exchange rate (REER) of the dollar in October was 17 percent above its level in mid-2014. Given the two-year lag from the exchange rate signal to the trade outcome, the US current account deficit is on track to widen from 2.7 percent of GDP this year to nearly 4 percent by 2021.
The new estimates, all based on October exchange rates, again find a modest undervaluation of the yen (by 3 percent) but no misalignment of the euro and Chinese renminbi. The Korean won is undervalued by 6 percent. Cases of significant overvaluation besides that of the United States include Argentina (by about 7 percent), Turkey (by about 9 percent), Australia (by about 6 percent), and New Zealand (by about 4 percent). A familiar list of smaller economies with significantly undervalued currencies once again shows undervaluation in Singapore and Taiwan (by 26 to 27 percent), and Sweden and Switzerland (by 5 to 7 percent).

This Policy Brief reviews US trade and investment policy programs focused on global development, such as the Generalized System of Preferences and the African Growth and Opportunity Act, and concludes that many are not realizing their full potential. The authors discuss seven pragmatic but transformative initiatives that could build on past policy successes and help unlock development for the world’s poor. Their proposals include broadening the coverage of US trade preferences for less developed countries to more products, modifying preference terms to encourage product diversification and value addition, improving the conditionality mechanisms under which preferences are granted, and strengthening the links between investment frameworks and development policy objectives. Each of these proposals presents political considerations that must be taken into account if they are to be implemented.

The disconnect between the United States’ massive increase in trade exposure and minimal (if any) associated rise in government spending to address trade-related costs is at the heart of the apparent turn toward protectionist politics in the 2016 US presidential election. Protectionist rhetoric is a surrogate for a deeper discussion about the role of the government in an increasingly open economy. Trade makes the United States better off as a whole, but evidence that the costs are unevenly shared is mounting. Trade and technological change have cost many American people their jobs, and social transfers (for unemployment, disability, retirement, and health care) are not closing the gap in their incomes. In this environment, both left- and right-wing populist candidates have been able to gain traction, in large part by attacking free trade. But trade may not be the culprit: Many advanced economies sustain much higher levels of trade exposure and do so with large social expenditures to address the costs. The protectionist turn this election year is the result of neither a sea change in public opinion on trade nor an anti-trade youth in revolt. At root, it is the result of government spending and compensatory policies not keeping up with technological and trade shocks—particularly the China shock—to the US labor market.
Deutsche Bank's recent troubles, including a fine by the US Department of Justice for allegedly misleading investors in the sale of mortgage-backed securities, have led to a decline in the bank's share price. The bank, however, is not insolvent and would not be even if the full $14 billion fine were levied. Its problems, nonetheless, should prompt policymakers to focus on whether banking sector reform after the financial crisis is on track. The new shocks from large legal fines add to concerns about capital adequacy. Low stock market prices may further reflect doubts about asset valuations, especially for derivatives, and about risk weightings using internal models. Cline notes that the decline in the bank's share price in both January–February and September was prompted by the specter of losses to additional tier 1 (AT1) bonds that count toward the bank's total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) imposed by the Basel III regulatory reforms. He concludes that the bank's difficulties provide further support for additional bank capital beyond Basel III targets. Higher equity capital provides a larger cushion against insolvency in the face of shocks. With equity a larger share of the TLAC target of 18 percent of risk-weighted assets under Basel III, an additional benefit would be the resulting reduction in the need for contingent (AT1) capital, which has proven to be a source of market instability when investors fear writedowns on (or conversions of) such obligations. Low market valuations mean that banks would need to raise additional equity over time through retained earnings rather than immediately through new issuance when share prices are depressed. This problem is currently more severe for large banks in Europe than for those in the United States. Banks may also need to change their basic business models and downsize their balance sheets gradually until share prices rise toward book values.

Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs)—government-controlled funds invested in whole or in part outside their home country—have grown in size, attracting political and financial attention focused on their lack of transparency. Suspicions have also grown about the motives behind their investments and their potential to disrupt countries economically, financially and politically. This Policy Brief updates and expands a prototype scoreboard rating the transparency and accountability of SWFs, which Truman established in 2007 to examine and promote the transparency and accountability of SWFs within and outside their countries. The first full scoreboard was released in April 2008, the second in September 2010, and the third in August 2013. The 60 SWFs scored in this fourth edition of the scoreboard record substantial differences: Some SWFs have high scores, others have low scores. Even funds within the same country have substantially different scores. Most important, many funds fall short of what the citizens of their countries or the international community should expect. On the other hand, the scores of many funds have improved over the past decade. The International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds (IFSWF) has been instrumental in promoting transparency and accountability of SWFs, and member funds generally score higher than nonmember funds. But the Forum can do more to increase its membership and improve the transparency of its members.

Foreign direct investment (FDI)—whether mergers and acquisitions or “greenfield” ventures built from the ground up—is generally thought of as reflecting decisions based on long-run factors. Conventional wisdom on capital flows holds that FDI inflows are “good flows,” while assessments of portfolio and other flows are more ambiguous. When considering restrictions on capital flows, the first reaction of researchers and policymakers is to want to exclude FDI inflows. Blanchard and Acalin find that FDI flows measured in the balance of payments are actually quite different from this depiction of FDI. Their analysis reveals that FDI inflows and outflows are highly correlated, even at high frequency and using different methodologies, and that FDI flows to emerging-market economies appear to respond to the US monetary policy rate, even at high frequency. Based on these findings they reach two conclusions. First, in many countries, a large proportion of measured FDI inflows are just flows going in and out of the country on their way to their final destination, with the stop due in part to favorable corporate tax conditions. Second, some of these measured FDI flows are much closer to portfolio debt flows, responding to short-run movements in US monetary policy conditions rather than to medium-run fundamentals of the country. Both these conclusions have implications for how researchers and policymakers should think about capital controls and the exclusion of measured FDI from such controls.

In August 2016, the European Competition Commissioner ordered US technology giant Apple Inc. to pay Ireland €13 billion ($14.5 billion) after ruling that the tax breaks Ireland gave the company in 1991 and 2007 breached EU state aid rules. Both Apple and Ireland announced they would appeal. The US Treasury Department criticized the European Commission’s new approach as applied in the Apple case, as well as the retroactive component of the decision and its detrimental impact on the ability of member states to honor bilateral tax treaties. If the European Court of Justice upheld the Commission’s decisions in the Apple and similar cases, the Competition Commissioner would get broad powers to override member state domestic tax laws and rulings, and future state aid decisions could become the most important investment policy measures in Europe over the next few years. In a worst-case scenario for Europe, many multinational corporations could dial back their planned investments. Apple’s tax dispute has renewed congressional interest in US business tax reform, highlighting the fact that the US corporate tax code puts US-based multinational companies in a less competitive position than their international peers and has made the United States an unfavorable location, from a tax standpoint, in which to set up their headquarters.

Global trade growth slowed abruptly after 2010, following decades of expansion. Annual world merchandise trade growth stayed below 3 percent for the fourth consecutive year in 2015. As global trade has slowed, the growth rate of productivity—defined as output per hour worked—is declining worldwide, markedly since the global financial crisis in most advanced countries and many emerging-market economies. This Policy Brief examines the possibility that reduced volumes of trade have impeded growth in productivity because of diminished competition in national economies and the shrinking role of comparative advantage. Although factors other than trade—notably physical and human capital accumulation and path-breaking innovations—also drive productivity, the negative contribution of sluggish trade growth is significant. The authors calculate that if US two-way trade had grown at its historical annual rate of 5.86 percent between 2011 and 2014, annual US productivity growth would have been substantially higher than what it was over those four years. The historical growth rate in trade would have delivered a $74 billion increase in US GDP through supply-side efficiencies in 2014. The next US president should view renewed trade liberalization as essential to enhancing productivity and spurring economic growth in the decade ahead.

This Policy Brief reassesses macroeconomic policies in the current environment of low growth and low interest rates in major advanced economies. Despite low rates, demand remains anemic. The scope for monetary policy, which has carried much of the burden to stimulate demand, is increasingly limited. But there is plenty of room for fiscal policy to increase output, and it should be explored more aggressively. On specific economies, there is a strong case for higher inflation in the United States, the eurozone, and Japan, but for different reasons: In the United States, as insurance against the next recession; in the eurozone, to allow periphery countries to improve competitiveness without deflation; and in Japan, to reduce the burden of debt. 

The economic and financial crises in euro area countries since 2010 have tested the viability of the euro area and continue to challenge the future of the seven-decade European integration project. Euro area leaders reluctantly brought the International Monetary Fund (IMF) into the management of six of these crises—in Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain—through the provision of financing and the design of economic and financial rescue programs. The IMF's Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) reviewed the Fund's handling of four of these crises: in Greece (first program), Ireland, Portugal, and Spain. The report is bureaucratically constrained in its language, but the underlying message is distinctly critical of the IMF: Political influence on IMF decision making was excessive, the IMF did not implement a coherent euro area strategy, and the IMF failed to comply with its own standard for transparency and, therefore, accountability. This Policy Brief provides some background on the IEO and summarizes the conclusions of the IEO report. It then addresses four aspects of the report and its examination of the IMF's performance in these crises: addressing the crises individually rather than as a crisis for the euro area as a whole, the charge of excessive political intervention in the formulation of IMF policies for these countries, the IMF's lack of transparency and accountability both in these programs and vis-à-vis the IEO, and issues surrounding the Greek debt restructuring and the IMF's policy on exceptional access to Fund financial resources.

The modern global economy is fueled by consumers, companies, and governments communicating and exchanging information via the internet. But as people around the world engage in e-commerce, seek jobs, and share intimate details about their lives via social media, concerns arise over the vast stores of personal data possessed by multinational companies—and the risk that information transmitted over cyber networks can become readily available to US intelligence and law enforcement agencies. To allay these concerns, the United States and the European Union signed the Privacy Shield Pact on July 12, 2016, aimed at protecting individual privacy while meeting the legitimate needs of companies and the government. This Policy Brief elucidates the elements of that pact, a revision of earlier agreements covering the same issues. It argues that the pact reflects a reasonable compromise between legitimate competing interests but that as commerce expands, as concerns about invasions of privacy grow, and as the United States faces increasing threats from terrorists, criminals, and hackers in the cyber world, some of its provisions may need to be adjusted, especially if new international agreements are reached on trade, investment, and e-commerce. 

Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models have come to play a dominant role in macroeconomic research. Some see them as the sign that macroeconomics has become a mature science, organized around a microfounded common core. Others see them as a dangerous dead end. This Policy Brief argues that the current DSGE models are seriously flawed, but they are eminently improvable and central to the future of macroeconomics. To improve, however, they have to become less insular, by drawing on a much broader body of economic research. They also have to become less imperialistic and accept to share the scene with other types of general equilibrium models.

Almost a decade after the onset of the global crisis, government debt-to-GDP ratios in the advanced economies have stabilized well above their precrisis levels. Living with high debt is living dangerously: When government debt is large, an increase in interest rates causes a sizable rise in the cost of debt service and therefore in the risk of financial crisis brought about by an interest rate–debt spiral. Reducing high debt ratios poses a daunting challenge, because the range of options for reducing debt is more limited than it once was and economic growth in the next decade is expected to be lower—as a result of population aging and the lingering effects of the crisis—than it was before the global crisis. Declines in the long-run economic growth rate drive increases in the government debt-to-GDP ratios and lead to fiscal crises, including defaults. Past studies have underestimated—in tone, if not necessarily in substance—the role of economic growth in determining the path of debt ratios. This Policy Brief proposes an extended accounting approach that fully recognizes the importance of economic growth in this regard, by keeping track of the impact of growth on the primary fiscal surplus. It concludes that a gradual but sustained fiscal adjustment through expenditure cuts and revenue increases is the most appropriate means of reducing the chances of debt crisis in the coming decade.
This Policy Brief presents forecasts of medal counts at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Building on previously developed statistical models that analyze the correlations between Olympic success and socioeconomic variables, the models underlying these forecasts go further, adjusting for the distortions in the historical record created by large-scale boycotts (Moscow 1980, Los Angeles 1984) and doping. The latter consideration is critical to forecasting success in Rio insofar, as the forecasts are strongly influenced by performance at the immediately preceding Games. Subject to uncertainties over Russian participation and the possible impact of the Zika virus, the forecasts indicate that the United States is likely to continue to earn the greatest number of medals, but China is closing the medal gap. Brazil should get a boost from hosting the Games, but its home field advantage may not be as great as experienced by prior hosts. Slumping performance in Rio could add to Britain's post-Brexit malaise.

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), signed in February 2016 between the United States and 11 countries in the Asia-Pacific, is the most comprehensive trade deal ever negotiated between developed and developing countries. To be sure, the TPP is not yet ratified and US implementing legislation in particular faces significant resistance. Despite strong protectionist undercurrents in the US political debate, however, the TPP merits congressional approval because of its impetus to trade and economic growth, its innovative rules governing areas such as digital trade, state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and environmental policies, and its positive impact on strategic relations with important US allies. This Policy Brief assesses how the TPP is likely to shape bilateral and regional trade initiatives in the Asia-Pacific and set precedents for new multilateral trade initiatives. Given the large economic footprint of TPP countries, the TPP will affect the economies of both participating and nonparticipating countries alike and influence the trade talks in the Asia-Pacific region in which they are engaged. TPP precedents also could contribute to the revival of multilateral trade negotiations in the World Trade Organization.

Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) employ about half the American workforce, and as a result their needs are deemed important for the economic health of the United States. From this perspective, the fact that 98 percent of exporters are small businesses suggests that trade is a critical component to the economic vitality of SMEs. Proponents of trade agreements argue that such agreements open markets to businesses of all sizes and that simplifying customs and promoting e-commerce can especially help small businesses. But critics of trade agreements cite the relatively high share of total exports by large firms as an indication that large firms—and their investors—are the main beneficiaries of open markets. This Policy Brief examines the evidence for these conflicting claims and shows that exports from both small and large firms are boosted when trade barriers are reduced. Foreign market liberalization offers as much to small firms as it offers to large firms. One important difference is that exports from small firms are likely to be boosted by increased participation—i.e., more firms export when trade costs fall—while exports from large firms are more likely to grow in volume—i.e., each firm exports more.

The US dollar is overvalued by about 7 percent, approximately the same amount as estimated last year (May and November 2015). Divergent phases of monetary policy in the United States, on one hand, and the euro area and Japan, on the other, and a collapse in commodity prices drove the stronger dollar. After rising about 5 percent from October 2015 (the base of the November 2015 assessment) to January 2016, the real effective exchange rate of the dollar fell slightly below its October level by April 2016 (the base of the current estimates). This semiannual evaluation also finds the yen is slightly undervalued (by 3 percent) despite its recent strengthening, but there is no misalignment of the other two leading currencies, the euro and Chinese renminbi.

The 2016 US presidential election campaign has rekindled the debate over offshoring—locating business operations and jobs overseas—by US-based multinational corporations (MNCs). Some presidential candidates have assailed investments abroad by US-based MNCs as damaging to economic growth and jobs at home. They have proposed imposing a higher tax on US companies that engage in offshoring and outsourcing. These proposals will not not bring back the lost jobs and plants. Instead they would disrupt global supply chains that link the US economy to the rest of the world and are crucial for US exports and US employment, ultimately harming US competitiveness worldwide and threatening existing jobs. In addition, protectionist efforts to impede trade will likely trigger a backlash from trading partners.

After short-term interest rates in many advanced economies fell below 1 percent, central banks turned to quantitative easing (QE) to support economic growth.
They purchased massive and unprecedented amounts of long-term bonds in an effort to reduce long-term borrowing costs. Nevertheless, recovery from the Great Recession proved disappointingly slow. Recently, some central banks have pushed short-term interest rates slightly below zero to provide an additional boost to growth. The slow recovery and the turn to negative rates have raised questions about the benefits of QE bond purchases and whether their effectiveness has reached a limit. Gagnon reviews the outpouring of research on QE and its effects and finds overwhelming evidence that QE does ease financial conditions and supports economic growth. The channels are similar to those of conventional monetary policy. QE can be especially powerful during times of financial stress, but it has a significant effect in normal times with no observed diminishing returns. Rarely, if ever, have economists studying a specific question reached such a widely held consensus so quickly. But this consensus has yet to spread more broadly within the economics profession or the wider world.

The housing market lies at the center of the biggest banking crises across the world. The recessions that follow these banking crises are generally deeper and longer than others. The collapse of housing prices amid rising unemployment is a major source of inequality. Persaud explains how the nexus between housing, banking, and the economy can be broken. He shows that two modest regulatory changes would result in life insurers and pension funds providing mortgage finance, which would better insulate the economy and homeowners from the housing cycle than financing from banks or markets can. History shows that safer housing finance would do more to make the financial system resilient than all the other recent initiatives combined.

One of the legacies of the global financial crisis is a high ratio of public debt to GDP. While current levels may be sustainable, another series of bad shocks could easily tip the balance and lead to unsustainable debt ratios and to default. The quantitative exercises presented in this Policy Brief show that growth-indexed bonds can play an important role in that context. By decreasing payments when growth is low, they can substantially reduce the "tail risks" associated with explosive debt paths starting from today's high ratios. The introduction of growth-indexed bonds will benefit highly indebted advanced economies and, in the euro area, might provide a partial market-based solution to attain valuable insurance benefits well ahead of a formal fiscal union.

Blanchard reexamines the behavior of inflation and unemployment and reaches four conclusions: (1) Low unemployment still pushes inflation up; high unemployment pushes it down. Put another way, the US Phillips curve is alive. (2) Inflation expectations, however, have become steadily more anchored, leading to a relation between the unemployment rate and the level of inflation rather than the change in inflation. In this sense, the relation resembles more the Phillips curve of the 1960s than the accelerationist Phillips curve of the later period. (3) The slope of the Phillips curve, i.e., the effect of the unemployment rate on inflation given expected inflation, has substantially declined. But the decline dates back to the 1980s rather than to the crisis. There is no evidence of a further decline during the crisis. (4) The standard error of the residual in the relation is large, especially in comparison to the low level of inflation. Each of the last three conclusions presents challenges for the conduct of monetary policy. Wisdom gained from the experience of the 1960s and later will be needed.

Of all the free trade agreements (FTAs) concluded by Korea with its major trading partners since the turn of the century, the Korea-China FTA may be the largest in trade terms. It is, however, far from the best in terms of the depth of liberalization and the scope of obligations on trade and investment policies. Korea and China agreed to liberalize a large share of bilateral trade within 20 years, but both sides incorporated extensive exceptions to basic tariff reforms and deferred important market access negotiations on services and investment for several years. Political interests trumped economic objectives, and the negotiated outcome cut too many corners to achieve such a comprehensive result. The limited outcome in the Korea-China talks has two clear implications for economic integration among the northeast Asian countries. First, prospects for the ongoing China-Japan-Korea talks will be limited and unlikely to exceed the Korea-China outcome. Second, Korea and Japan need to strengthen their bilateral leg of the northeast Asian trilateral and the best way is by negotiating a deal in the context of the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].
After surviving its worst economic downturn since the Great Depression and the near collapse of its common currency, Europe is now engulfed by hundreds of thousands of desperate migrants and refugees from the Middle East and Africa. It needs new and permanent migration institutions and resources not only to accommodate the influx of refugees but also to set up a new border control system throughout the region. These demands pose a challenge for European policymaking as serious as the euro crisis of the last five years. Kirkegaard proposes a migration and mobility union, to be implemented gradually, with the goal of comprehensively reforming European migration policy.


While women's presence in the leadership ranks of international sporting bodies has increased over the past decade, women continue to be underrepresented relative to their involvement in sports. Seeing qualified women in sports leadership positions can serve as a strong motivator for female athletes, which is important given the strong link between girls' participation in sports and positive outcomes in education, health, and positioning in the workforce. The important multiplier effects that sports can have for girls and women, and the important effects that positive female outcomes can have for economic growth, makes promoting gender equality in sports leadership a wise societal investment.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].

In the next two decades, hundreds of millions of people in emerging economies are projected to reach income levels at which they will be able to afford cars and air travel. As purchasing power increases worldwide, people will spend proportionately less on food and beverages and more on transportation. Higher spending on transportation, especially in China, India, and Sub-Saharan Africa, will increase pressures on the infrastructure in these economies and aggravate global climate change. Governments will need to respond to these challenges in a fiscally sustainable and environmentally responsible way.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [zip].

The latest semiannual fundamental equilibrium exchange rate (FEER) estimates find that the US dollar is now overvalued by about 10 percent, comparable to levels in 2008 through early 2010 and again in 2011. Unlike then, the current strong dollar does not reflect a weak renminbi kept undervalued by major exchange rate intervention by China. Instead, China's current account surplus has fallen sharply relative to GDP, and its recent intervention has been to prevent excessive depreciation rather than to prevent appreciation. Additionally, declines in the real effective exchange rates (REERs) for major emerging-market economies and resource-based advanced economies, driven by falling commodity prices in recent months, have strengthened the dollar. Recent increases in the REERs for the euro area and Japan have removed their modest undervaluation identified in the last FEERs estimates in May, and the Chinese renminbi remains consistent with its FEER.
The dollar's rise by nearly 15 percent in real effective terms over the past two years could impose a drag of nearly one-half percent annually on US demand growth over the next five years. As the Federal Reserve moves to normalize US monetary policy, it may need to consider a gentler rise in interest rates than it might otherwise have pursued, both to temper possible further strengthening of the dollar in response to higher interest rates and to help offset the demand compression from falling net exports.
Data disclosure: Data are available for download for the SMIM model [xlsx] underlying this analysis, the calculation of real effective exchange rates [xlsx], and the figures and tables [xlsx] in this Policy Brief. The data underlying the interactive FEERs map are available here [xlsx].

The rules and buffers created in the last few years to enable the euro area to withstand another sudden stop of credit and market-driven panic in one or more of its member states are welcome steps, but they are widely recognized as inadequate. Ubide proposes creating a system of stability bonds in the euro area, to be issued by a new European Debt Agency, to partially finance the debt of euro area countries—up to 25 percent of GDP. These stability bonds should be initially backed by tax revenues transferred from national treasuries, but ultimately by the creation of euro area–wide tax revenues, and used to fund the operations of national governments. They could also be used for euro area–wide fiscal stimulus, to complement the fiscal policies of member states. Such bonds would strengthen the euro area economic infrastructure, creating incentives for countries to reduce their deficits but not forcing them to do so when such actions would drive their economies further into a downturn. The bonds would permit the euro area to adopt a more flexible or expansionary fiscal policy during recessions.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].

In the 15 years of President Vladimir Putin's rule, state control over economic activity in Russia has increased and is greater today than in the immediate postcommunist era. The concentration of political and economic power in Putin's hands has led to an increasingly assertive foreign policy, using energy as a diplomatic tool, while plentiful revenues from extractive industries have obfuscated the need for structural reforms at home. The West's 2014 sanctions on Russia have brought about economic stagnation, and with few visible means of growth, the economy is likely to continue to struggle. Watching Europe struggle with its own growth, in part because of deficiencies in its economic model, Russia will not be convinced to divert from state capitalism without evidence of a different, successful economic model. Changing course can only be pursued in the presence of political competition; the current political landscape does not allow for such competition to flourish.


For more than a decade, China has complained about what it maintains has been a pattern of erratic and politicized treatment of Chinese investors when they attempt to acquire US companies. The Chinese want the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) to be more open and transparent in its rulings and to not discriminate against Chinese firms. The United States is not likely to accede to these demands in any formal or legal manner. Moran proposes practical steps to address the concerns of Chinese investors without diluting CFIUS procedures. He provides a national security threat assessment filter, which allows Chinese investors—like investors of all nationalities—to determine when their proposed acquisitions might pose a genuine threat and when any such threat is simply not plausible. He also suggests that first-time Chinese investors seek expert counsel to overcome the secrecy surrounding CFIUS objections to figure out how to proceed with problematic acquisitions.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].

Public lending by the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES) may have done more harm than good in Brazil, adversely affecting real interest rates and productivity growth. Specifically, BNDES's large amounts of subsidized lending are responsible for substantial credit market segmentation, choking off monetary policy transmission. As a result, to maintain price stability the Central Bank of Brazil is forced to raise interest rates more than it might do otherwise in the absence of BNDES lending. Restoring Brazil's capacity to grow in the medium term requires a thorough rethinking of the role of BNDES. In particular, the bank's lending rates should be aligned with market prices, term and risk premia, while taking into account that, with an adequate transparency framework, public development banks can increase private sector participation instead of crowding it out.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [zip].

The global financial and economic crisis that began in 2008 has rekindled the debate on the impact of fiscal policy on economic growth. At the outset of the crisis the focus—particularly in the United States—was on whether fiscal stimulus (an expansion in the fiscal deficit) boosts economic growth. Since 2011 or so, with the depth of the crisis becoming more severe in some European countries and Greece in particular, the emphasis of the debate has shifted to whether fiscal adjustment (a reduction in the fiscal deficit) curtails economic growth. Public discourse has been heavily influenced by simple charts analyzing the correlations between measures of fiscal "austerity" and economic growth for small samples of countries over limited time periods. Mauro and Zilinsky analyze the correlations in the data starting from the simplest and gradually building up, in a step-by-step, transparent manner, to multivariate regressions based on various samples of countries for different periods. The results show that simple correlations are no longer significant when considering slightly longer sample periods and omitting outliers, like Greece, from the sample. In multivariate regressions using broader samples, a tightening of fiscal policy is significantly associated with lower economic growth only in some specifications and estimation samples. On the whole, the data offer partial support to the notion that fiscal choices and output growth are correlated.
Data disclosure: The Stata dataset [dta] underlying the figures in this analysis is available here [zip].

Reshoring—when firms shift manufacturing production back to the United States—has been getting a great deal of publicity lately. Oldenski examines the most recent data on the global operations of US firms and concludes that although some companies have reversed their previous offshoring decisions, there is no evidence of a widespread reshoring trend. But this should not be considered a defeat for US competitiveness. US multinationals continue to move operations offshore, but they also continue to grow stronger, producing more in their US operations and adding more to total US exports. The structure of US manufacturing has changed, but the ability to adapt to the changing nature of global business has been and will continue to be crucial to the continued growth of US manufacturing.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].
Korea's decision to delay joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) talks was a tactical mistake. It is now left with primarily two options to participate: (1) ask to join the TPP, if possible between signature and entry into force, or (2) accede to the TPP after the agreement is ratified and goes into effect—either alone or as part of a group of countries seeking TPP membership. For Korea the burden of adjustment in the TPP—in terms of liberalization commitments—will probably be higher than had it joined as an original signatory. As a major trading nation, it stands to reap large gains from increased trade and investment with TPP countries and should opt to join the TPP as soon as the window for entry reopens.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].

Using his European Debt Simulation Model (EDSM), Cline examines whether and to what extent additional debt relief is needed in Greece under the new circumstances. Greece's debt burden is significantly lower than implied by the ratio of its gross debt to GDP, because of concessional interest rates on debt owed predominantly to the euro area official sector. The IMF's call for debt relief recognizes the lower interest burden but argues that the gross financing requirement is on track to exceed a sustainable range of 15 to 20 percent. But in the Fund's June Debt Sustainability Analysis that threshold would not be exceeded until after 2030. A sustainability diagnosis based on such a distant future date would seem at best illustrative rather than definitive. The euro area creditors might, nonetheless, be well advised to provide two types of interest relief: an earmarked portion of interest otherwise due to finance a public works employment program; and additional interest relief to compensate for budget shortfalls caused by growth below plan levels. The sovereign debt situation should be alleviated by carrying out the bank recapitalization directly from the European Stability Mechanism to the banks, rather than through the sovereign as the intermediary. The large increase in the ratio of gross debt to GDP imposed by bank recapitalization is mostly an optical illusion because there would be a corresponding rise in state assets, but this increase could, nonetheless, further erode perceptions of sustainability.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].

Since the promising start of its transition from a centrally planned economy to capitalism, Hungary has failed to join Western Europe in terms of living standards and democracy. The dominant political figure in Hungary, Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, shares many features with Russian president Vladimir Putin. Both view the increasing role of the state as economically beneficial, and both consider the Western European economic model to be flawed. Hungary is headed towards centrally planned capitalism, demonstrated by the partial nationalization of the banking sector, the monopolization of some sectors of the economy, and the reversal of the pension reforms of 1998. Plagued by the most persistent budget deficit of any post-communist country, Hungary's greatest challenge is to establish a fiscally sustainable growth path.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].

For nearly three decades, the dominant view on the role of the financial sector in economic development has been that greater financial depth facilitates faster growth. However, the Great Recession has shaken confidence in that view because of the contributing role of high leverage and such financial innovations as collateralized subprime mortgage-backed assets and derivatives on them. Recent studies from the International Monetary Fund and Bank for International Settlements have argued that "too much finance" reduces growth. In an environment of new doubts about finance following the Great Recession, these studies finding that there can be too much of it seem to have struck a responsive chord. Cline warns that these findings should be viewed with considerable caution. He first shows that correlation without causation could similarly lead to the conclusion that too many doctors spoil growth, for example. He the demonstrates algebraically that if the variable of interest, be it financial depth, doctors, or any other good or service that rises along with per capita income, is incorporated in a quadratic form into a regression of growth on per capita income, there will be a necessary but spurious finding that above a certain point more of the good or service in question causes growth to decline. In some situations, finance can become excessive; the crises of Iceland and Ireland come to mind. But it is highly premature to adopt as a new stylized fact the recent studies' supposed thresholds beyond which more finance reduces growth.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].

Regulatory standards protect consumers from defective products, but they impede trade when they differ across countries. The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) seeks to reduce distortions in the automobile and other industries. Freund and Oliver evaluate the equivalence of automobile regulations in the United States and the European Union in terms of catastrophe avoidance and estimate the trade gains from harmonization. The UN 1958 Agreement on automobiles, which harmonizes regulations among signatories, is used to quantify the trade effect of regulatory convergence. The removal of regulatory differences in autos is estimated to increase trade by 20 percent or more. The effect on trade from harmonizing standards is only slightly smaller than the effect of EU accession on auto trade. The large economic gains from regulatory harmonization imply that TTIP has the potential to improve productivity while lowering prices and enhancing variety for consumers.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [zip].

Plummeting oil prices combined with asymmetric phasing of quantitative easing (QE) in the United States versus the euro area and Japan has prompted unusually large changes in major exchange rates over the past year. New estimates of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs) find the major currencies are now misaligned, with the US dollar moderately overvalued and the euro and yen modestly undervalued. However, the Chinese yuan is no longer undervalued. Just over half of the 34 economies followed in this series experienced changes in real effective exchange rates (REERs) of about 6 percent or more from April 2014 to April 2015. The most important changes were the large effective appreciations by the US dollar (about 12 percent) and the Chinese yuan (about 12 percent), and the large effective depreciations of the euro (about 11 percent) and the yen (about 8 percent). Although the dollar has risen to about 8 percent above its FEER, it is too early to conclude that any adverse effects of the stronger dollar outweigh the benefits associated with stimulus to global growth from additional QE in the euro area and Japan. However, if the dollar were to continue along a path of further strengthening, the associated distortions could prove counterproductive for both the United States and the world economy at some point.
Data disclosure: Data are available for download for the SMIM model [xlsx] underlying this analysis, the calculation of real effective exchange rates [xlsx], and the figures and tables [xlsx] in this Policy Brief. The data underlying the interactive FEERs map are available here [xlsx].

Since the onset of the Federal Reserve's unconventional program of large scale asset purchases, known as quantitative easing (QE), some economists and financial practitioners have feared that the consequent buildup of the Fed's balance sheet could lead to a large expansion of the money supply, and that such an increase could cause a sharp rise in inflation. So far fears about induced inflation have not been validated. This Policy Brief examines the basis for the original concerns about inflation in terms of the classic quantity theory of money, which holds that inflation occurs when the money supply expands more rapidly than warranted by increases in real production. The Brief first reviews the US experience and shows that whereas rapid money growth might have been a plausible explanation of inflation in the 1960s through the early 1980s, subsequent data have not supported such an explanation. It then shows that the quantity theory of money has not really been put to the test after the Great Recession, because a sharp increase in banks' excess reserves and corresponding sharp decline in the "money multiplier" has meant that the rise in the Federal Reserve's balance sheet has not translated into increased money available to the public in the usual fashion. The most likely aftermath of quantitative easing remains one of benign price behavior. However, if nascent inflationary conditions materialize, the Federal Reserve will need to manage adroitly the large amounts of banks' excess reserves that have accumulated as a consequence of QE in order to limit inflationary pressures.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].

Latin America's recent economic performance has been disappointing. After a very strong recovery from the Great Recession, growth has slowed considerably, and prospects for 2015 are dim. Among the seven largest economies in the region, output is expected to contract in Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela, and Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru are projected to grow by only about 3 percent. The decline was not caused by external factors but was mostly cyclical in nature and a result of low productivity. Although monetary and fiscal policies may still have a role in supporting demand in some instances, the main problem in the region is not a lack of demand but low productivity growth. Efforts must be made to foster productivity. Institutional weakness must be addressed and inequality reduced if sustainable high growth is to resume.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [zip].

Solvency II, which the European Parliament adopted in March 2014, codifies and harmonizes insurance regulations in Europe to reduce the risk of an insurer defaulting on its obligations and producing dangerous systemic side effects. The new directive tries to achieve these aims primarily by setting capital requirements for the assets of insurers and pension funds based on the annual volatility of the price of these assets. Persaud argues that these capital requirements will impose an asset allocation on life insurers and pension funds that does not serve the interests of consumers, the financial system, or the economy. The main problem with Solvency II is that the riskiness of the assets of a life insurer or pension fund with liabilities that will not materialize before 10 or sometimes 20 years is not well measured by the amount by which prices may fall during the next year. Solvency II fails to take account of the fact that institutions with different liabilities have different capacities for absorbing different risks and that it is the exploitation of these differences that creates systemic resilience. To correct this problem, Persaud offers an alternative approach that is more attuned to the risk that a pension fund or life insurer would fail to meet its obligations when they come due and less focused on the short-term volatility of asset prices.

Conventional wisdom holds that the United States lags behind many other advanced countries in its spending on social, health, and welfare programs. In this Policy Brief, Jacob Kirkegaard argues that conventional wisdom is faulty, in that it overlooks the role of tax systems and private spending in delivering social programs in different societies. Taking the full effects of tax systems and spending by private and public sources into account, Kirkegaard finds that the true level of US social expenditures is fully comparable to European spending—and yet yields worse outcomes than in Europe. High aggregate social spending in the United States has a very low impact on overall income inequality and healthcare outcomes, for example. The Policy Brief also concludes that the United States relies excessively on tax subsidization to the detriment of fiscal sustainability, transparency, and redistributive fairness.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].
Japan is reemerging as the most important source of foreign direct investment (FDI) in the United States. In 2013 Japanese firms were the largest source of new inflows of FDI into the United States for the first time since 1992, injecting almost $45 billion of fresh investment into the US economy in that year alone. Moran and Oldenski show how Japanese investment in the United States differs from that of other countries along several dimensions. These differences not only make FDI by Japanese firms especially valuable but point to some important policy goals for attracting it. Although the automotive sector is the single largest industry for Japanese investment in the United States, the focus should not be on competing to attract the auto industry in particular nor should any active industrial policy of "picking winners" be pursued. Japanese investment is unique because of its research and development intensity, manifested across a number of industries in which Japanese multinationals invest other than automobiles. US policy should focus on reinforcing and expanding the factors that attract high-performing firms and high-value production stages to the United States, regardless of industry.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [xlsx].

Faced with slowing economic growth, Chinese policymakers now recognize that the service sector of the economy—transportation, communications, finance, and health care—could spur economic activity and employment. The catch is that China must reform these and other areas to accomplish this goal. Chinese leaders have outlined an ambitious agenda for reform, but myriad vested interests could slow or block their plans. This Policy Brief evaluates the steps taken so far and the difficulties that lie ahead in implementing them. If policymakers fail to reform and open up the service sector, they run the risk of seriously impairing China's growth prospects.
Data disclosure: The data underlying the figures in this analysis are available here [zip].

After the Obama administration's four failed attempts to win congressional approval of the 2010 quota and governance reform for the International Monetary Fund (IMF), it is time to recognize that implementation of the agreement may be indefinitely delayed. The international community must therefore prepare for the likelihood of a new world order in which the IMF augments its funding and reforms its governing structure without US participation. This Policy Brief examines four options for the IMF: First, wait for the US Congress to pass the necessary legislation. Second, complete a new, augmented IMF quota and governance package and again wait for the United States to give its formal approval. Third, bypass the US Congress and risk losing the US veto over a few important decisions on the structure of the IMF. Fourth, let the Fund adopt a reform and financing package within a structure that potentially excludes US participation and eliminates the US veto in the new entity.

Most forecasts for emerging and developing economies reflect excessive optimism that is both statistically significant and economically relevant, according to a study of forecasts for horizons of up to 20 years in more than 100 countries. This Policy Brief argues that for rapidly growing economies, forecasters overestimate the persistence of growth. Forecasters for poorly performing economies, on the other hand, expect that growth will not simply revert to the mean but rather will exceed it. The size of such optimistic forecast errors could cause a large shock that poses risks for macroeconomic policy management and debt sustainability, with the potential to plunge a stable country into debt crisis within one or two decades. To correct excessive optimism, forecasters should give greater consideration to adverse shock or low growth scenarios. Less optimistic scenarios should be at the forefront of policymakers' and investors' deliberations, because they are probably more realistic than the existing baseline scenarios.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available for download as a zip file. Data from Consensus Forecasts are proprietary and cannot be reproduced here.

This semiannual review finds that most of the major international currencies, including the US dollar, euro, Japanese yen, UK pound sterling, and Chinese renminbi, remain close to their fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs). The new estimates find this result despite numerous significant exchange rate movements associated with increased volatility in international financial markets at the beginning of the fourth quarter of 2014, and despite a major reduction in the price of oil. The principal cases of exchange rate misalignment continue to be the undervalued currencies of Singapore, Taiwan, and to a lesser extent Sweden and Switzerland, and the overvalued currencies of Turkey, New Zealand, South Africa, and to a lesser extent Australia and Brazil. Even so, the medium-term current account deficit for the United States is already at the outer limit in the FEERs methodology (3 percent of GDP), and if the combination of intensified quantitative easing in Japan and the euro area with the end to quantitative easing in the United States were to cause sizable further appreciation of the dollar, an excessive US imbalance could begin to emerge.
Data disclosure: Data are available for download for the SMIM model underlying this analysis [xlsx], the calculation of real effective exchange rates [xlsx], and the figures and tables in this Policy Brief [xlsx]. 

Ukraine has experienced a year of unprecedented political, economic, and military turmoil. The combination of Russian military aggression in the east and a legacy of destructive policies leading to pervasive corruption has plunged the country into an existential crisis. The West, meanwhile, has been largely paralyzed with uncertainty over how to assist Ukraine without reviving Cold War hostilities. Yet all is not lost for Ukraine. The successful elections of President Petro Poroshenko in May and a new parliament in October offer an opportunity for economic reform, despite the continuing military threat. The window of opportunity is likely to be brief, however. The new government will have to act fast and hard on many fronts to succeed. Åslund lays out the strategy.
View Ukrainian translation published at Spilnobachennya.

Bail-ins and creditor haircuts have long been a feature of resolutions and recapitalizations when banks have become, or are on the verge of becoming, "gone" concerns. The public outcry against taxpayer bailouts has led to the development of something new—the automatic bail-in of creditors of institutions that are still "going concerns." Bail-in securities, commonly known as cocos (contingent, convertible capital instruments), convert into equity once a bank's capital falls below a preannounced level. Even before the ink is dry on regulators' proposals, banks have started to issue cocos and the market has quickly grown to a capitalization of $150 billion. Bail-in securities may make sense for an idiosyncratic bank failure. But they do not make sense in the more common and intractable case where many banks get into trouble at roughly the same time as the assets they own go bad. On such occasions these securities, which may also have encouraged excessive lending, either will inappropriately shift the burden of bank resolution on to ordinary pensioners or, if held by others, will bring forward and spread a crisis. If more gold plating of bank capital is what is required, then this fool's gold will not do.

Despite a lack of consensus among Koreans, Korean officials recognize that—sooner or later—Korea will need to be part of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). Jeffrey J. Schott and Cathleen Cimino conclude that Korea should seek to join the TPP as soon as possible if it can manage its bilateral trade issues with Japan in a pragmatic way. If politics and economic sensitivities prevent such a step, Korea should encourage TPP participants to institute an "open enrollment" period soon after the TPP deal is signed and immediately take advantage of it. Korea should also try to conclude an ambitious trade deal with China, paving the way for China to join TPP as well.

China's property market has slowed more than expected, leading to fears that the Chinese economy faces a hard landing, even a financial crisis, comparable to Japan's two decades ago. However, it is premature to compare the Chinese property market now with the Japanese property bubble and collapse in the early 1990s, or the US housing market collapse in 2008. China's continuing urbanization, available policy options, and the stage of its property market development all suggest that China's property market is experiencing simply another cyclical adjustment. Indeed, the current slowdown could catalyze the phase-out of outdated and irrelevant policies and accelerate necessary institutional developments in China's property market.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx].

The escalating crisis in Ukraine has prompted the United States and Europe to impose the toughest economic sanctions against Russia since the end of the Cold War. Continued instability and military conflict in eastern Ukraine are straining Ukrainian finances. Despite a generous international support package, the government faces shrinking revenues, rising costs, and a spike in foreign debt payments over the next two years.
A single measure can free up $3 billion for Ukraine and send a powerful message to Russia: The United Kingdom can refuse to enforce English-law contracts for the money Russia lent former Ukrainian resident Yanukovych late last year. Ukraine could then walk away from this debt without the usual legal and market consequences of repudiation. Such debt sanctions would reinforce the financial, energy, and trade sanctions under way, and by themselves would represent an appropriately targeted response to the conflict. They would be in line with international law and legislative precedent in the United Kingdom and Europe, most recently used for Iraq and the poorest countries—and would, uniquely among sanctions tools, offer financial relief for Ukraine.
Horizontal drilling and fracking are transforming global energy production, consumption, and trade leading to a surge of domestic production in the United States. Free exports of liquefied natural gas, crude oil, and other energy products are an essential complement of US international economic policy, which has long advocated free trade in raw materials, unconstrained by export barriers or restrictions. The Obama White House should prod the Department of Energy, the Department of Commerce, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and other agencies to speed up their approvals of such exports. Short of lifting full restrictions on crude oil exports, the Department of Commerce should build on its recent exemptions for ultralight oil condensate and exempt light crude oil from the current export prohibitions with determination that sales to Europe are consistent with the US national interest.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx].

Laments over the decline of the manufacturing base in the United States are widespread. But while manufacturing employment has steadily declined for many decades, more direct measures of manufacturing productivity show that the growth of the US manufacturing sector has actually been strong and not simply in the subsectors affected by computer production. In the last two years, the United States has been doing much better than most of the rest of the world, including China. In addition, the Policy Brief shows that increased offshoring by US manufacturing multinational corporations (MNCs), a phenomenon criticized as contributing to domestic job losses, is actually associated with overall greater investment and increases in jobs at home. New evidence also suggests positive effects of offshoring by US manufacturers on research and development (R&D) spending in the United States. Accordingly, policies aimed at restricting global expansion by US MNCs would be misguided.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx].

Economists have long decried the efforts of large, advanced economies to manipulate their currencies to boost net exports at their trading partners' expense. But the International Monetary Fund appears to have ignored the beggar-thy-neighbor exchange rate policies of countries with developed, highly open economies. This Policy Brief examines Switzerland, Singapore, and Hong Kong, which have actively kept the value of their currencies low since the 2008–09 global recession. In each case, greater fiscal and especially domestic monetary ease would have achieved similar macroeconomic outcomes with less currency intervention and declining current account surpluses. If such countries had adopted these strategies to increase domestic demand, the global economy would have rebounded faster.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available in quarterly  [xlsx] and annual [xlsx] form.

The renminbi is not yet an international currency that could challenge the position of the dollar or the euro, but it is heading in that direction. Chinese officials support the limited goal of increasing usage of the renminbi in international transactions, but they do not publicly advocate full reserve-currency status and free convertibility that such status would require. Yet international use of the renminbi is an important element of China's reform agenda. China has announced the opening of offshore renminbi centers in Hong Kong, Singapore, Taipei, London, Frankfurt, Paris, and Luxembourg, to the delight of offshore investors eager to invest in the renminbi, which has not depreciated significantly against the dollar since 1994 and is widely viewed as having further room for appreciation given China's strong economic fundamentals. The ability of Chinese exporters and importers to make and accept payments in renminbi is helping to drive the growth of offshore renminbi markets. The excess of settlements in renminbi by Chinese importers over renminbi settlement by Chinese exporters leads to growing volumes of renminbi deposits offshore. But the renminbi cannot become a true international currency until Chinese authorities drop their strict limits on capital flows between China and the rest of the world.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx]. Proprietary data are available from Bloomberg.

The latest estimates of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs) in this semiannual series indicate that the currencies of the United States, the euro area, China, and Japan are approximately at their FEER levels and need no adjustment to reduce excessive external imbalances. The medium-term current account, however, is at the lower bound of the desired range for the United States and at the upper bound for the euro area and China. For Japan, even though a large improvement in the current account remains in the pipeline from the lagged influence of the past sharp depreciation of the yen, higher fuel import costs and export weakness mean the surplus is unlikely to rise above 3 percent of GDP; the new FEER estimate for the yen is therefore significantly lower than before. A familiar list of currencies remain persistently overvalued (New Zealand, Turkey, South Africa, and Brazil) and undervalued (Singapore, Taiwan, Sweden, and Switzerland).
Data disclosure: Data are available for download for the SMIM model underlying this analysis [xlsx], the calculation of real effective exchange rates [xlsx], and the figures and tables in this Policy Brief [xlsx]. 

Germany's large current account surpluses have been criticized as a major cause of slower economic growth in the euro area periphery, especially Greece, Spain, and Italy. Critics repeatedly call on Germany to boost domestic demand and allow wages to rise. This Policy Brief argues that Germany should indeed act to reduce its current account surplus, but not for the reasons that critics give. Rather the German government should recognize that its large surpluses expose German savers to potential financial losses, bailout costs, and opportunity costs associated with low (negative) domestic real interest rates. Instead of accelerating wage growth in excess of productivity, Germany should increase public investments in the domestic economy and raise its ceiling on public indebtedness.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx].

The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) between the United States, Mexico, and Canada, which took effect 20 years ago, continues to face divided public opinion. Opponents of free trade agreements (FTAs) cite NAFTA as a job-killing precedent, while proponents argue that the economic gains from NAFTA have been considerable and unappreciated. This Policy Brief analyzes the record of NAFTA in order to clear the air so that the benefits and challenges of trade can be examined objectively. In the last 20 years, trade, investment, and economic interdependence among the three countries have grown dramatically. Nearly 2 million US jobs now depend on trade with Mexico. Closer integration with the United States and Canada has transformed Mexico's auto industry from a minor backwater into a major automotive powerhouse. The analysis presented here argues that increased trade with Mexico led to some US job losses during adjustments but that these were very small compared to the usual churn and to job losses due to other factors over the same period. The pact contributed some to wage losses in manufacturing but not to any lasting and significant increase in US unemployment. Also contrary to what opponents predicted, NAFTA did not encourage more illegal immigration to the United States. Above all, NAFTA created a new foundation for US-Mexican relations by facilitating Mexico's transition to a multiparty political state with a market-oriented system.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx].

In recent years, South Korea has been a major investor in North Korea, and South Korean firms have employed more than 50,000 North Korean workers. The hope has been to use economic engagement to lessen the North's direct state control over the economy and to encourage greater internal opening. This transformational vision however rests on unexamined assumptions about the impact of employment on North Korean behavior. New results from a groundbreaking survey of South Korean employers indicate that the North Korean government has limited its citizens' exposure both to South Koreans and to market-oriented economic practices. South Korean investment in North Korea may benefit the firms and workers involved, but evidence of broader spillovers is lacking. A South Korean campaign organized around workers' rights would complement economic engagement to increase the positive spillovers from South Korean employers in the North.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx].

Myanmar is in the midst of a long and difficult multifaceted transition, involving political liberalization, economic reform, and the resolution of multiple long-standing civil conflicts. The country has a history of ethno-religious conflict and separatism. Civil-military relations are muddy, and business-military-state relations are similarly opaque. An ongoing natural resource boom, and the blessings and curses that come with it, further complicates these developments. Given the country's evident institutional weaknesses, external policy anchors could play a critical role in this transition. Hendrix and Noland address the possible role for such international precommitment mechanisms—in particular, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)—in Myanmar's growing extractive sector.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx].

The new chair of the Federal Reserve, Janet Yellen, contends that there is considerable slack in the labor market, and that the Fed is monitoring several measures of labor market conditions to assess that problem. This Policy Brief provides new analysis on one of these measures, the US labor force participation rate. It questions the view that much of the decline is structural in nature, attributable to demographic factors. Underemployment—the phenomenon of workers wanting to work more hours but who are unable to do so—has also kept wages down. The implication for Federal Reserve policy is that low labor participation provides an additional measure of labor market slack, and that a substantial portion of US workers inactive in the labor market should not be treated as gone forever, but should be expected to spring back into the labor market if demand rises to create jobs. The Fed should be trying to address this issue along with trying to stabilize prices.
>> Download the draft Policy Brief 
For underlying data, download the following:
>> Figures 1–7 [xlsx]
>> Figure 8 [xls]
>> Figures 9–10 [xlsx]
>> States and selected areas: Employment status of the civilian noninstitutional population, January 1976 to date, seasonally adjusted [xls]
The failure in mid-January by the US Congress to approve IMF reform legislation halted progress on Fund governance and damaged the US reputation around the world. If the IMF is to benefit strong and troubled economies alike, the administration and the Congress must make every effort to pass this legislation before the early-April meeting of the International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC). The reform legislation is designed to strengthen the IMF without the need to authorize additional funding, and there is no economic, financial, or political downside for the United States. The main issue before the US Congress is to ensure that the institution is credible in the eyes of all regions and countries. US formal approval is the only thing standing in the way of its implementation.

Women have come a long way in sports, as the recent winter Olympics demonstrated, but more progress is called for. Studies show that girls with access to sports reap far-reaching benefits throughout their lives. Girls who play sports do better in school, suffer fewer health problems, achieve more in subjects (such as science) long dominated by men, and hold better jobs. While lowering barriers to girls in education and labor markets, all countries, especially in the developing world, should incorporate physical education programs for girls, train teachers in gender sensitivity, and guarantee equal access to facilities, equipment, and mentors. See also: Why Sports Programs for Girls Can Help Women Play with the Big Boys, RealTime Economic Issues, March 7, 2014.

Four years ago, President Barack Obama set the goal of doubling exports within five years and creating 2 million new export-related jobs. The strategy put in place, however, has failed to achieve superior growth. Freund argues that the emphasis on small and medium enterprises in the National Export Initiative, while attractive, was misguided and recommends a specific set of policies that the administration should concentrate on to boost exports. An export boom requires a system that encourages the largest firms to invest and expand exports and facilitates the rapid growth of new highly efficient firms so we get more export superstars. She recommends (1) maintaining a competitive exchange rate, (2) US leadership on market access trade agreements, and (3) improving the business climate, including training and migration to fill the skills gap, encouraging investment and innovation, more stable energy prices, and championing trade openness.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx].

Inflation in the euro area is too low, and the European Central Bank (ECB) is at risk of missing its price stability mandate. With the market forecasting average inflation in the euro area over the next five years in the 1.25 to 1.5 percent range, the ECB must prepare to act forcefully to push inflation higher. The ECB should (1) update the definition of price stability as inflation at 2 percent over 2 to 3 years to eliminate the ambiguity over the inflation objective; (2) reduce risk premia in the yield curve via a program of quantitative easing, making clear that this is a monetary policy operation—and thus legal under the Maastricht Treaty; and (3) ease the quantitative credit shortages to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) via a well-designed lending program, offering long-term funds at the policy rate to banks who lend to SMEs. These actions would restore price stability and encourage sustainable growth.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx].

The global economic crisis in 2008 produced pledges from countries around the world to avoid new barriers to trade and investment. These commitments were largely honored when it came to tariffs and quotas, but not when it came to nontraditional forms of protection, including behind-the-border, nontariff barriers such as local content requirements (LCRs). This Policy Brief analyzes the impact of the widely used requirements that local suppliers of goods, services, and even entire projects be favored. It explains why the steps to prevent such protectionism have been effective and further recommends a new World Trade Organization (WTO) code to constrain the use of LCRs, enhance transparency, expedite dispute resolution, and impose penalties for noncompliance.

The amount of assets held by the Federal Reserve has dramatically increased since 2009. It recently crossed $4 trillion and will likely peak at about $4.5 trillion. This increase is the result of the Fed's large-scale asset purchase programs, which were intended to support economic growth. However, these purchases have created unprecedented amounts of liquidity in the financial system. Gagnon and Sack doubt that the Fed can smoothly conduct monetary policy along the lines of the previous operating framework in this environment of high liquidity. Instead of reducing bank reserves to achieve a target level for the federal funds rate, they propose a new operating framework that would allow the Fed to maintain an elevated balance sheet along with abundant liquidity in the financial system. They argue that the Fed should set the rate at which it will offer overnight reverse repurchase agreements as its policy instrument, with the interest rate paid on bank reserves set at the same level. The federal funds rate would become just one of the various overnight interest rates determined by the market in the normal transmission of monetary policy.
Data disclosure: Publically available data underlying this analysis are available at the Federal Reserve website. Proprietary data are available from Blue Chip, Bloomberg, and Credit Suisse.

The Great Recession—which cost tens of millions of people their jobs, was accompanied by large movements in asset values, and threatened the global financial system—has strengthened concerns over the fairness of the distribution of wealth and income in many societies. Using data on eight advanced economies (Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Slovakia, Spain, the United Kingdom, and United States) between 2007 and 2010, Tomas Hellebrandt shows how the Great Recession affected income inequality in different countries and how families and the state tried to mitigate its impact—primarily through redistributing income within households and through benefit and tax policies. The social safety net and changes in direct taxes have counteracted the increase in income disparities. This Policy Brief argues that increasing direct taxes can contribute to reducing inequality, while tax cuts tend to make the distribution of disposable incomes more unequal. In addition, means-tested social assistance benefits mitigate inequality better than work-related social insurance programs.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx].

Currency manipulation—governments of foreign countries intervening to suppress the value of their currencies to lower the prices of their exports and increase the prices of their imports—has vexed the United States for many years. Because most of the intervention takes place in US dollars, the dollar has been pushed to systemically overvalued levels. The US current account deficit has averaged $200 billion to $500 billion per year higher as a result of the manipulation. Several other countries, including the weak euro area economies, emerging-market countries such as Brazil and India, and many small and poor countries, have also suffered the ill effects of currency manipulation. In light of large and widespread trade effects, Bergsten calls for addressing the issue through trade agreements, especially when the International Monetary Fund and other institutions have failed to resolve it for so long. He recommends adding a currency chapter in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which is currently under negotiation and could be the earliest trade agreement to come before Congress for approval. Including clear obligations to avoid currency manipulation in the TPP and other future trade agreements, along with an effective dispute settlement mechanism and sanctions against violators, would very likely deter future manipulation.

Germany has the best functioning labor market among large economies in the West. In the eyes of some, however, its success comes with a price. Questions have been raised over whether Germany's labor reforms have lowered living standards, especially for low-income workers, worsening income inequality. Germany has also been accused of selfishly riding a wave of strong foreign demand for German exports. Kirkegaard shows that Germany's recent labor market success—its low unemployment rate, high labor participation rate, and increased productivity—has indeed resulted from the structural labor reforms in the early 2000s. But the expansion of low-wage "mini-jobs"—criticized for allegedly squeezing the low-wage workforce—largely results from their increasing use as second jobs, and labor market success can be achieved at no additional rise in inequality.
Data disclosure: The data underlying this analysis are available here [xlsx].

In October 2013, the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds (IFSWF) released its second evaluation of progress by sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) in implementing the Santiago Principles of transparency and accountability. The report, Truman says, exaggerates the extent of implementation of the principles by SWFs associated with the IFSWF. It states that all of the funds participating in the survey have implemented each of the Santiago Principles at least partially, which is contrary to research conducted by Truman. A number of the SWFs associated with the IFSWF register very low on his SWF scoreboard and have shown little improvement. The 2013 IFSWF report does not provide the impetus necessary to promote more extensive adherence to and implementation of the principles by members and nonmembers of the IFSWF, which should be the goal of the forum.
Janet Yellen, who will serve as the 15th chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System after her likely confirmation in December 2013, faces some formidable challenges as the economy and financial system continue to recover from the long-lasting effects of the global financial crisis and the accompanying Great Recession. Stockton lists five key challenges: (1) exercise caution in further scaling back the Fed's third round of large-scale asset purchases, known as quantitative easing (QE3); (2) attend to the dual mandate of the Federal Reserve—the twin objectives of achieving maximum sustainable employment and stable prices; (3) improve integration of financial stability considerations into the monetary policy framework; (4) further improve the Fed's communications and transparency; and (5) effectively lead the regulatory mission of the Federal Reserve.

Since the previous estimates of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs) in May 2013, numerous exchange rates have moved substantially in response to the US Federal Reserve's announcement that it would likely begin to "taper" its quantitative easing. Despite widespread concern that this "taper shock" has wreaked havoc in international capital and currency markets, exchange rate misalignments have tended to narrow in the past six months. Overvalued currencies have corrected downward in Turkey, South Africa, India, Indonesia, and even Australia. Medium-term surplus estimates have moderated in Taiwan, Sweden, Switzerland, and Japan, narrowing the extent of their undervaluations. Cases of large misalignments persist, however, with Singapore once again undervalued by 21 percent, New Zealand again overvalued by nearly 18 percent, and Turkey still overvalued by 18 percent despite some correction. The overvaluation of the dollar and undervaluation of the Chinese renminbi remain modest and no longer constitute the severe imbalances of 2006–07.
Data disclosure: The SMIM model underlying this analysis is available here [xlsx], and the calculation of real effective exchange rates is available here [xlsx]. The data underlying the interactive FEERs map are available here [xlsx].

Inflation targeting countries with flexible exchange rates performed better during the global financial crisis and its aftermath than countries with a fixed exchange rate. Countries that maintained a hard fixed exchange rate throughout the past six years performed somewhat better than those that abandoned it. But, abandoning a hard fix during a crisis is itself evidence of the economic costs of fixed rates. It is particularly telling that no inflation targeting country with a flexible exchange rate abandoned its regime during the crisis. Policymakers in many countries are averse to volatile exchange rates—they have a "fear of floating." Gagnon's results strongly suggest that flexible exchange rates enable countries to weather crises better than fixed rates and that the benefits of flexible rates are not limited to large countries. Policymakers should replace their fear of floating with a fear of fixing.

International factors, such as the dramatic increase in imports from emerging-market economies, especially China, have been widely blamed for the decline in manufacturing employment in the United States over the past decade. The authors argue, however, that far more important in causing that decline has been the slow overall growth in US employment and powerful historical forces that have affected all advanced economies: a combination of rapid productivity growth and demand that is relatively unresponsive to income growth and lower prices. To be sure, US manufacturing employment can grow in the short run. The labor content of the US manufacturing trade deficit remains significant and a vigorous US and global economic recovery could boost US manufacturing employment. Over the long run, however, absent new product innovations, or a shift in consumer preferences, the basic forces leading to declining manufacturing employment are unlikely to abate.

The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) can deepen the already substantial ties that bind the United States and the European Union in the world's largest economic and strategic alliance. Since both sides have included financial services in prior trade pacts, they implicitly recognized that the TTIP would also cover this sector. But what will be included in the financial services chapter is still subject to debate. Particular concerns arise about how the TTIP could impact the still unsettled European financial reforms and the introduction of new US rules pursuant to the Dodd-Frank legislation of 2010 or other potential US regulatory initiatives. The authors believe that the TTIP can complement the extensive efforts already in train in financial forums by making regulatory policies more transparent and by creating opportunities for trade and investment in financial services in both markets. A broader role for TTIP in harmonizing financial regulation is not an appealing idea—and not one that sits well with current US official thinking.

The 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act increased the powers of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System along almost all dimensions pertaining to the supervision and operation of systemically important financial institutions. The authors argue that in light of these changes, the process of considering and choosing governors should also be changed. In nominating and confirming new governors, the president and Congress should make greater efforts to appoint only highly qualified people familiar with both regulatory and monetary matters. They should ensure that governors can work effectively with staff and engage on an equal basis with the chair. This is a pressing matter given that within the next 12 months there may be as many as four appointments to the Board, reflecting an unusually high degree of turnover at a critical moment for the development of regulatory policy, including rules on equity capital funding for banks, the ratio of debt-to-equity (leverage) they are permitted, the funding structure of bank holding companies, and whether and how much banks should be allowed to engage in commodity-related activities.

The Chinese financial system stands at a crossroads. The response to the global financial crisis eroded some of the hard-earned discipline put in place during the 2000s. As a result, significant risks have accumulated, and the financial sector once again appears vulnerable to large-scale credit misallocation and spiraling bad debts. Reducing these risks will take a new wave of concerted action. Absent better regulation, the tremendous growth of credit in recent years has the potential to result in large-scale financial distress.

The evolving plan for a European banking union falls short of the ideal of an "ever closer union." In fact, the plan's focus on national resolution authorities and funds for insolvent financial institutions, a minimal euro area financing backstop, and costs imposed on creditors of failed banks, could lead to a looser, weaker, and more fragmented banking system. Some aspects of the plan of European leaders will improve the system's soundness, but other aspects could dampen lending in the near term and reduce economic growth. Ubide urges policymakers to focus on making the banking union stronger and more coherent. Troubled banks supervised by the European Central Bank should be covered by a European resolution authority and a European resolution fund to oversee bankruptcy, restructuring, and other reforms. To produce a more united, solid, and stable euro area, the European plan has to lower national barriers to banking, not raise them.

Ukraine's intention to sign the European Association Agreement at the Vilnius summit in late November 2013 has raised a furor in the Kremlin, which wants it to join the Customs Union instead. In retaliation, Russia has imposed trade sanctions against Ukraine in clear violation of its obligations in the World Trade Organization (WTO). Åslund argues that Europe, Ukraine, and Russia all share the blame for creating the current impasse and must alter their policies to resolve the conflict. Ukraine should improve its macroeconomic policies to reduce its vulnerability and also comply with all EU demands, including releasing Yulia Tymoshenko. The European Union should support Ukraine but also make sure that Ukraine meets its conditions so that both parties can sign the agreement in November. The Association Agreement will bring substantial gains to Ukraine, whereas the Customs Union is smaller, less competitive, and does not offer Ukraine any significant benefits. Russia should realize that it is not in its national interest to force countries to join its Customs Union. It should obey the rules of the WTO and the Commonwealth of Independent States Free Trade Agreement and end its trade sanctions against Ukraine. The United States and the European Union should defend Ukraine against Russian economic aggression in the WTO and through vocal and economic support.

Five years after the Federal Reserve and Treasury allowed the investment bank Lehman Brothers to fail, while rescuing Bear Stearns, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and AIG, their actions (or inaction) remain a focus of debate. Cline and Gagnon present evidence that federal officials, at least in hindsight, appear to have followed the dictum of Walter Bagehot that lending should be granted only to solvent entities. Lehman was insolvent—probably deeply so—whereas the other institutions arguably were solvent. The other institutions had abundant collateral to pledge, whereas what little collateral Lehman had to pledge was of questionable quality and scattered across many affiliated entities. While the Fed and Treasury had a sound reason to let Lehman fail, the shock to financial markets that ensued from its collapse sent the financial crisis into a new, more acute phase and may have contributed to the severity of the Great Recession. Therefore the lesson from Lehman is not only that Bagehot-type lender-of-last-resort action is as important as ever but also that it is critical to ensure an orderly resolution for a systemically important financial institution going bankrupt.
Many of the world's advanced economies continue to struggle with sluggish growth and high unemployment, especially among younger workers. One reason for high unemployment in countries such as Greece, Portugal, and Spain is a mismatch between the skills demanded by employers and those available among the population. This mismatch can be addressed in part through the implementation of apprenticeship programs. Boosting apprenticeships could give both European and US workers much-needed skills and a competitive edge. Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, three countries with low youth unemployment, offer valuable policy lessons in apprenticeship education.

Economists and the financial world have grown increasingly excited about or alarmed by the growing influence of sovereign wealth funds (SWFs), though in recent years the public debate about their role has subsided. Politicians in countries in which the funds invested have generally welcomed the additional financial resources from abroad while expressing concern about the motivations of investors and possible threats to political, economic, and financial security. Countries in which the funds were based have wanted to know more about how their national wealth is invested. Responding to these concerns, authorities and managers responsible for SWFs in many countries have taken steps to demystify the funds. This update on the transparency and accountability of SWFs, based on the SWF scoreboard first developed by Truman in 2007, finds that many of the funds have made substantial progress in providing more information about and accountability for their activities, but that the progress has not been uniform and more is needed.

Located in north central Asia, Mongolia is on the verge of an economic boom as foreign investors extract and exploit its rich deposits of natural resources, among them copper, gold, and coal. But the onset of a mining boom in Mongolia has also generated widespread concerns about the potential damage to traditional agriculture and the environment, the lack of infrastructure and water resources, and the dangers of increased economic inequality, inflation, fiscal instability, corruption, and lack of transparency. The reelection of President Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj on June 26, 2013, provides an opportunity to reassess how the country has fared in dealing with the mining boom and identify the best policy options to avoid the "resource curse."

New obstacles to the European banking union have emerged over the last year, but a successful transition remains necessary and possible. The European Central Bank (ECB) gains supervisory authority over most of Europe's banking system in late 2014, but first there must be a rigorous balance sheet assessment that is likely to trigger significant bank restructuring, for which preparation has not started. This step will be more consequential than current discussions about a bank resolution directive and bank recapitalization by the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). The ECB's new authority, accompanied by a later change in the European treaties to establish the legal basis for a union, will serve as a bridge to a sustainable banking policy framework for Europe.

When the new Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, meets with President Barack Obama this month, they will have a lot to talk about. In the economic sphere, the paramount challenge for the two leaders is to overcome what might be called the Kindleberger Conundrum: the preservation of the open, rules-based multilateral economic system against the background of the historic shift in which the rising power (China) might be unwilling to sustain it at a time when the declining power (the United States) is increasingly unable to single-handedly shoulder the burdens of leadership. The two nations must overcome their mutual wariness and strike a Power-for-Purpose Bargain: The United States would give up power in existing multilateral institutions in return for China taking on greater global leadership to preserve the system’s real purpose.

In this semiannual update, William R. Cline presents new estimates of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs). Once again it is found that the key cases of the United States and China involve only modest over- and undervaluation, respectively. However, the Japanese yen is found to have fallen substantially below its FEER as a consequence of the aggressive quantitative easing policy, and Cline suggests that if the currency continues much further along a downward path, the G-7 may need to consider joint intervention to curb its decline. The study concludes by adding a variant of the calculations in which rich countries are set a floor target of at least a zero current account balance, and emerging market economies are set a ceiling target of zero balance. In this "aggressive rebalancing" in which capital would no longer flow "uphill" from poor to rich countries, the US dollar would require a much larger depreciation and the Chinese renminbi a much larger appreciation.

In less than a decade, China has developed a shadow deposit system similar in scope and function to money market mutual funds in the United States. Wealth management products in China have emerged as an important source of short-term financing for the Chinese economy and are likely to continue to grow in coming years. These products promise savers higher interest rates than the controlled rates on traditional bank deposits but offer fewer investor protections. As such, these financing pools are vulnerable to rapid retrenchment when financial difficulty forces investors to reevaluate the risk of these investments. Consequently, a source of potential financial instability has been created in the Chinese economy. US experience in regulating shadow deposits offers useful lessons for China to guide its own financial development in a healthier direction.

In the early 1990s, US export controls that aimed to keep high-tech goods and technologies out of the hands of enemies deterred from $15 billion to $25 billion of such exports. Recent US export controls seem to deter US high-tech exports considerably less. As percentages of seven broad industrial categories of high-tech exports, estimated American export shortfalls from national security controls have fallen from roughly 5 percent in the early 1990s to slightly over 1 percent in the mid-to-late 2000s. Ongoing reform of American national-security export controls would seem to have only modest effects on the level of US high-tech exports. American exporters seem to have developed a distinctive competitive ability to shift their sales efforts flexibly among customers and products that are subject to tight, loose, and few controls. Important importing countries seem to have developed a distinctive ability to shift their sourcing flexibly among alternative suppliers, including a growing set of emerging exporters of high-tech goods. They are, however, still denied half of their potential high-tech imports from the ten exporters from which the authors draw their estimates.

Italy changed its debt contracts, Belize passed new debt legislation, and Taiwan sued Grenada this year, all in response to a string of court rulings in New York that tried to make Argentina pay its debts from its financial crisis in 2001. The court rulings have gone to unprecedented lengths to isolate Argentina but are unlikely to make the country pay. The rulings, however, do threaten collateral damage to other countries and parts of the financial system. The lawsuit—NML Capital Ltd. et al. v. Republic of Argentina—promises to shift the balance of power from sovereign debtors to their creditors. The shift would come courtesy of one obscure debt contract term, the pari passu clause, that has gained destructive power in a case where the government and its creditors are uniquely willing to test the limits of the law. The impact may be magnified against the background of public debt distress in Europe, new emerging-market restructurings, and regulatory focus on clearing and payment systems.

Theodore H. Moran cites recent instances of the US government intervening to block foreign producers of information technology (IT) from selling goods and services to US firms and argues that such actions based on the nationality of the foreign firm is ineffective, discriminatory, and unfair. The dangers and risks of compromise of US national security are real. But in a world where supply chains of IT companies of every nationality are thoroughly globalized, a better way to protect national security would be to establish a multilateral nondiscriminatory system to ensure the integrity of equipment, software, patches, and upgrades from all sources. Much remains to be done to establish an appropriate regime to protect national security and also the rights of investors and companies doing business with foreign firms. The goal should be to strike a balance between protecting national security without discouraging foreigners from investing in and doing business with US firms. 
Generating technological progress requires deploying the full range of policy instruments, including those related to trade policy. The authors consider four areas: subsidization of green goods and technologies; border-tax adjustments (BTAs) related to carbon content; restrictions on the export of fossil fuels, especially natural gas; and intellectual property protection of new technologies and products related to climate change. They propose changes to trade rules that would promote climate change goals. The proposed changes have an underlying political economy logic and consistency. Changes would allow global environmental "bads" to be penalized (by permitting border taxes on less clean imports), global environmental goods and technologies to be promoted (by relaxing the constraints on the use of production and export subsidies and strengthening IPR protection), and prevent global environmental "goods" being penalized (by eliminating the export restrictions on natural gas).

The debate about "tax reform," during the 2012 presidential race and congressional budget battles this year has centered on closing loopholes, creating new incentives for growth, and raising revenue through higher personal taxation of wealthy Americans. But the debate overlooks an important priority for future US economic growth: the urgent need to reform the corporate tax. US-based multinational corporations (MNCs) are hobbled by an outmoded tax structure as they compete in the age of globalization. Reform would make American MNCs stronger competitors in markets abroad and enable them to expand and invest more at home. Tax rates should be lowered, both on profits earned in the United States and profits earned abroad.

A comprehensive Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) has important implications for both US-EU bilateral trade and the world trading system. If successful, it could strengthen transatlantic economic relations while also spurring trade reforms that could reinvigorate flagging multilateral trade negotiations. Both sides want the TTIP to be a big deal covering all major components of the commercial relationship. They can achieve the pact's ambitious agenda by (1) broadly aligning their respective trade pacts with South Korea and (2) deepening market access commitments covering both tariff and nontariff barriers to trade in goods, agriculture, and services. KORUS and KOREU FTA precedents are instructive but will need to be supplemented or adjusted in three areas if the TTIP is to succeed: intellectual property issues, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, and the environment. In several other areas KORUS-KOREU differences should be easier to bridge, including services, investment, government procurement, and competition policy.

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) continues to play an indispensable role in stabilizing the world economy and financial system, but it will need assistance (particularly from the US Congress) if it is to continue to help troubled and strong countries alike. US leadership has been crucial in promoting reform of the IMF. Legislation is now before the Congress to cement recent reform agreements. That legislation will strengthen the IMF without the need to authorize one additional dime of the taxpayers' money and with no economic, financial, or political downside for the United States.

Prohibitions or restrictions on US exports of liquefied natural gas (LNG) are a bad idea. LNG exports will deliver economic benefits to the US economy. The US Department of Energy should approve pending LNG export applications for projects at an advanced planning stage, in conjunction with appropriate regulation to limit environmental dangers from wells to ports. Three strong considerations support this recommendation: (1) The United States regularly opposes export restraints on natural resources by other countries; (2) contrary action by the United States would violate World Trade Organization rules and lead foreign nations to ignore the rules as well; and (3) LNG export restrictions would contradict the Obama administration’s stated goal of growing US exports.

Special resolution regimes for banks and systemically important financial institutions are an attractive alternative to both insolvency and public bailouts and have a compelling track record. The European Council has outlined a policy sequence of three successive steps including the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), the Bank Recovery and Resolution (BRR) Directive and the operational framework for direct recapitalizations, and the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). Implementing this sequence will involve a complex balancing of short-term, medium-term, and long-term objectives. The creation of the SRM will be a key milestone and should take place as early as possible.

The euro area crisis has probably passed the acute phase, but it has entered a chronic and unstable phase of fractured credit markets, too high funding costs, very weak growth, and dim expectations. More austerity and reforms at the national level alone will not be enough to stabilize the euro area. To ensure its sustainability, the euro area needs to be reengineered to restore political solidarity, end the debate on default and exit, strengthen its institutions and launch eurobonds, and refocus cyclical policies towards stabilizing the business cycle. Without these steps, the euro will never be a credible and sustainable monetary union.

Severe recession in 2010–12 drove the need for sovereign debt reduction in Greece, despite a massive cut in government spending. The 2012 restructuring cut privately-held debt by about 50 percent, but much debt was exempt (IMF, euro area governments, ECB), and new borrowing was needed to recapitalize banks. In December an official sector package of lower interest rates, buybacks, and remittance of ECB profits on Greek bonds boosted total relief by about one third. Nonetheless, even under favorable conditions the ratio of debt to GDP is unlikely to be much below 120 percent by 2020, limiting market access for a country that has restructured with deep haircuts. Although Greek borrowing needs are now covered for several years, more relief from the official sector thus seems likely to be needed in the future.

The task of economic rebalancing is likely to demand much of the new Xi Jinping–Li Keqiang administration's energy and attention. Rebalancing entails implementation of large changes to fundamental economic policies, such as removing lingering price controls and opening up the closed financial system. It will also bring about a shift away from the economic winners of the past decade, namely manufacturers and property developers, towards private consumers and the service sector. Despite these challenges, rebalancing can be achieved while sustaining moderately fast economic growth.

A gaping hole in the current global economic architecture is the absence of a multilateral agreement on foreign direct investment (FDI). A multilateral investment agreement (MIA) was discussed extensively from 1970 to 1998 but never concluded. However, the need for such an agreement has increased in the last decade. FDI has grown substantially and now flows in both directions between developed and developing countries, with multinational corporations (MNCs) hailing from all parts of the world. The numerous bilateral investment treaties warrant an international standardized set of rules for FDI. With investment now clearly identified with MNCs and integrated with trade, the World Trade Organization has emerged as a natural home of an MIA.
More than 20 countries have increased their aggregate foreign exchange reserves and other official foreign assets by an annual average of nearly $1 trillion in recent years. This buildup—mainly through intervention in the foreign exchange markets—keeps the currencies of the interveners substantially undervalued, thus boosting their international competitiveness and trade surpluses. The corresponding trade deficits are spread around the world, but the largest share of the loss centers on the United States, whose trade deficit has increased by $200 billion to $500 billion per year. The United States has lost 1 million to 5 million jobs as a result of this foreign currency manipulation.
The United States must eliminate or at least sharply reduce its large trade deficit to accelerate growth and restore full employment. The way to do so, at no cost to the US budget, is to insist that other countries stop manipulating their currencies and permit the dollar to regain a competitive level. A US strategy to terminate currency manipulation, especially if undertaken together with some of the other countries that are adversely affected by the practice (including Australia, Canada, the euro area, Brazil, India, Mexico, and numerous developing countries), would be fully compatible with its international obligations. The proposed coalition should first seek voluntary agreement from the manipulators to sharply reduce or eliminate their intervention. If they do not do so, however, the United States should adopt four new policy measures against their currency activities: (1) undertake countervailing currency intervention (CCI) against countries with convertible currencies by buying amounts of their currencies equal to the amounts of dollars they are buying themselves, to neutralize the impact on exchange rates, (2) tax the earnings on, or restrict further purchases of, dollar assets acquired by intervening countries with inconvertible currencies (where CCI could therefore not be fully effective) to penalize them for building up these positions, (3) treat manipulated exchange rates as export subsidies for purposes of levying countervailing import duties, and (4) hopefully with other adversely affected countries, bring a case against the manipulators in the World Trade Organization that would authorize more wide-ranging trade retaliation.
In the first instance, this approach should be taken against eight of the most significant currency manipulators: China, Denmark, Hong Kong, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Switzerland, and Taiwan. Japan may need to be added if it pursues new Prime Minister Abe's stated intention to force a sharply weaker yen through dollar purchases. Bergsten and Gagnon believe that cessation of intervention by these countries will permit most of the other interveners to desist as well, without their being directly approached, because much of their intervention is aimed at avoiding competitive loss to the largest manipulators (especially China).

The establishment of the single supervisory mechanism (SSM) is only one step on a longer path towards European banking union, which itself cannot be considered in isolation from the challenges of fiscal union and political union. Losing the current momentum for the completion of this early step would be unfortunate, not only in itself but because it would reinforce the current doubts of the European public and global investors about the very ability of European leaders to make effective decisions. Recent statements issued by the 17 euro area countries contain a promise of supervisory integration and centralized bank crisis management. Europe's leaders now need to deliver on this promise if they are to maintain, or regain, the trust of their constituents.

In this semiannual update of their estimates of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs), William R. Cline and John Williamson again find that the overvaluation of the dollar and undervaluation of the Chinese renminbi have become much more modest than in previous years, as their current account imbalances have narrowed. Seriously undervalued currencies now include those of Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Malaysia, as well as the Swiss franc and Swedish krona. Serious overvaluation persists for Turkey, New Zealand, Australia, and (though less so than before) South Africa. The authors welcome the new External Sector Report of the International Monetary Fund, which generally finds the same directions of misalignment across currencies, with the notable exception of Switzerland. However, they criticize the Fund's methodology for conflating positive (observed pattern) and normative (systemically salutary) behavior, in particular by awarding high acceptable current account surplus targets, particularly to Singapore and Switzerland, because of financial center status and past accumulation of massive external assets.

Hyperinflation—usually 1,000 percent or more a year—occurs only under very special circumstances: in a disorderly breakup of a currency zone; after wars or revolutions, when monetary or fiscal authorities lack control; and when wild populism prevails. Åslund reviews the historical record and shows that hyperinflation does not arise by mistake but because of major dysfunction or mismanagement. Responsible countries with reasonable governance may default, but they do not have hyperinflation. The danger of hyperinflation, therefore, is an irrelevant concern for ordinary monetary policy. However, the fact that collapse of a large currency union with substantial imbalances usually causes hyperinflation raises concerns for the euro area. Large uncleared payments balances have accumulated between the member countries as the private interbank market has stopped functioning. On the one hand, the uncleared balances have grown massively and, on the other, the creditor countries demand that balances be capped, which would mean disruption of the currency zone. It is critical to prevent a disorderly collapse of the euro area at almost any price, and the most obvious measure is vigorous monetary expansion, even more so than at present. There is no historical evidence of monetary easing or even quantitative easing leading to hyperinflation. The second measure should be more rigorous fiscal austerity in the troubled countries.

America deserves credit for not having succumbed to the global financial crisis by repeating the protectionist mistakes of the 1930s. Nonetheless, since 2007, although lip service has been paid to boosting US exports, its trade policy accomplishments have been modest. This is unfortunate because active trade policies can promote American living standards and facilitate America's return to full employment and sustained growth. These policies can also help to create a global trade order that advances American interests. This policy brief argues that the United States needs new initiatives that discipline foreign practices, increase access to foreign markets, revitalize the World Trade Organization (WTO), improve the administrative and regulatory environment for trade, and assist workers and communities adversely affected by change.

One of the big questions of our time is whether the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) will survive. Too often, analysts discuss a possible departure of one or several countries from the euro area as little more than a devaluation, but Åslund argues that any country’s exit from the euro area would be a far greater event with potentially odious consequences. A Greek exit would not be merely a devaluation for Greece but would unleash a domino effect of international bank runs and disrupt the EMU payments mechanism, which would lead to a serious, presumably mortal, disintegration of the EMU. It would inflict immense harm not only on Greece but also on other countries in the European Union and the world at large.
When a monetary union with huge uncleared balances is broken up, the international payments mechanism within the union breaks up, impeding all economic interaction. Åslund’s critical argument for a domino effect is that the EMU already has large uncleared interbank balances in its so-called Target2 system. Exit of any country is likely to break this centralized EMU payments mechanism. These rising uncleared balances are a serious concern because nobody can know how they will be treated if the EMU broke up. Any attempt to cap them would risk disruption of the EMU. These balances need to be resolved but in a fashion that safeguards the integrity of the EMU. However, this can hardly be done by anything less than fully securing the sustainability of the EMU. If the euro area does break up, Åslund says, the damage will vary greatly depending on the policies pursued. On the basis of prior dissolutions of currency zones, such as the ruble zone in 1992/1993, he suggests that an amicable, fast, and coordinated end of the EMU would minimize the harm.

Widespread currency manipulation, mainly in developing and newly industrialized economies, is the most important development of the past decade in international financial markets. In an attempt to hold down the values of their currencies, governments are distorting capital flows by around $1.5 trillion per year. The result is a net drain on aggregate demand in the United States and the euro area by an amount roughly equal to the large output gaps in the two economies. In other words, millions more Americans and Europeans would be employed if other countries did not manipulate their currencies and instead achieved sustainable growth through higher domestic demand. Gagnon identifies the 20 most egregious currency manipulators over the past 11 years. Four groups of countries stand out: (1) longstanding advanced economies such as Japan and Switzerland; (2) newly industrialized economies such as Israel, Singapore, and Taiwan; (3) developing Asian economies such as China, Malaysia, and Thailand; and (4) oil exporters such as Algeria, Russia, and Saudi Arabia.
Although currency manipulation to boost trade balances is a violation of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), there is currently no procedure to punish or curtail it. The best forum for sanctions against currency manipulators is the World Trade Organization, operating in consultation with the IMF. Countries affected by currency manipulation would be authorized to impose tariffs on imports from manipulators. In order to get manipulators to agree to this change in international rules, the main targets of currency manipulation—the United States and the euro area—may have to play tough. One strategy would be to tax or otherwise restrict purchases of US and euro area financial assets by currency manipulators.

The euro crisis is fundamentally a political crisis. At its core the crisis is about national sovereignty and the process in which European governments can agree to transfer it to new, required euro area institutions governing banking sectors and fiscal policies. This transfer of national control over domestic banking sectors and fiscal policy, say Bergsten and Kirkegaard, will happen only during an extraordinary crisis. An imminent economic catastrophe is almost certainly needed to overcome daunting political obstacles, which during normal political times is nearly impossible to accomplish. For this reason, the euro area policy response can only be reactive. Proactive decisions to resolve the crisis in one fell swoop are politically impossible and unrealistic. The authors put forward the "on the brink" theory to characterize the current process of European economic integration. Ultimately, the threat of imminent collapse of the European financial system and indeed the common currency itself would prompt euro area policymakers to take every feasible step to avoid it, including transferring sovereignty to new institutions. The threat, while it exists, is not as imminent as most mainstream commentary makes it out to be. Europe is more solid and has more time to fix its problems than financial markets and analysts think. But leaders urgently need to take a number of very far-reaching political decisions, in particular on banking and fiscal union, during 2012. Every gradual step, however small, that policymakers take on the brink is a step toward completing the decades-long political project and should not be underestimated.

In the current financial crisis plaguing Europe, Latvia stands out for resolving its financial problems quickly and resolutely. After contracting 24 percent in 2008 and 2009, it grew at the rate of 5.5 percent in 2011. The speed and determination with which the government carried out austerity measures in 2009 and restored confidence after suffering the worst output decline is a crucial lesson for the ailing South European countries—Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain. Latvia has proven that internal devaluation—cutting wages and public expenditures—works and that it can turn around an economy quickly. Many policy observers and economists have dismissed Latvia's crisis resolution as irrelevant to the situation in Southern Europe. The Latvian orange, they say, cannot be compared with the South European apples. Åslund argues otherwise.
Latvia's achievement boils down to five crucial political economy principles, which the South Europeans ignored—and continue to ignore—at their peril. First, Latvia made full use of the grave sense of crisis in the fall of 2008. The sudden large output shock and liquidity freeze made the unthinkable possible and necessary. Second, the government implemented a comprehensive anticrisis program that was heavily front-loaded in the first half of 2009, which restored confidence early. Third, the program contained more expenditure cuts than revenue measures, which made it more realistic and drove structural reforms. Fourth, the International Monetary Fund and the European Union provided early and sufficient—not excessive—international financial support, making the crisis resolution financially sustainable. Finally, the government succeeded in its salesmanship of the adjustment program, by clarifying how severe the crisis was and by ensuring that the burden of the crisis was socially equitable. None of these five crucial conditions, which apply to any crisis resolution, have been satisfied by the South Europeans. They took their time to get a handle on their crises, wasting trust, patience, and resources in the process, and now are paying the price for their indecisiveness and leisurely approach.

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement, now in negotiation among nine Asia-Pacific countries, could yield annual global income gains of $295 billion (including $78 billion for the United States) and offers a pathway to free trade in the Asia-Pacific with potential gains of $1.9 trillion. The TPP is a crucial step on what is becoming a "Trans-Pacific track" of trade agreements, and its expected template promises to be unusually productive because it offers opportunities for the leading sectors of emerging-market and advanced economies. A parallel pathway that the authors call the "Asian track" includes agreements centered on the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), negotiations among China, Japan, and Korea, and proposals for pan-Asian free trade areas. Both the TPP and Asian tracks are large, positive-sum projects that would yield substantial net gains. Asian templates prepare the ground for cooperation by addressing primarily goods liberalization, but the TPP is likely to go further by liberalizing sectors important in both emerging-market and advanced economies (such as services and technology), thus expanding opportunities for trade between them. Together, the TPP and Asian tracks are a dynamic process—an example of competitive liberalization—that could consolidate the "noodle bowl" of existing trade agreements and lead to a Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific (FTAAP). A comprehensive agreement among all major Asia-Pacific economies does not appear to be feasible in the current macroeconomic and political context but hopefully will become more acceptable in the future. An ambitious TPP template would generate greater benefits from integration than less demanding alternatives, but it will be harder to sell to China and other key regional partners as the TPP evolves toward wider agreements. The importance of Asia-Pacific integration argues for an early conclusion of the TPP negotiations, without jeopardizing the prospects for region-wide or even global agreements based on it in the future.
The United States faces a “fiscal cliff” at the end of calendar year 2012, when the two major tax cuts from the Bush era and some other tax provisions will expire and in the absence of action scheduled reductions in spending will begin. The subsequent increase in taxes and reduction in spending would dramatically tighten the federal budget deficit at a time when unemployment remains high. On an annual basis the total impact of the fiscal cliff amounts to a reduction in the federal budget deficit of about $800 billion on a direct basis (about 5 percent of GDP). After taking account of revenue losses and extra social spending resulting from induced slowdown in the economy, the Congressional Budget Office places the net fiscal impact at $560 billion for the first nine months of 2013, implying $745 billion or 4.5 percent of GDP for calendar year 2013. An aging population and rising health care costs continue to boost federal spending under current policies, and it is critical that the United States put the budget on a sustainable path, which will require significant changes in spending  and tax policies. It is therefore difficult to escape the conclusion that it is a good thing that the United States faces a fiscal cliff. The expiration of the Bush era tax cuts at the end of 2012 provides a unique opportunity to raise tax rates and/or eliminate tax deductions so that the United States can restore federal revenue to at least 18 percent of GDP and probably more in order to meet growing fiscal needs associated with an aging population. The political pain of higher tax rates should concentrate political minds on the associated task of finding more ways of cutting spending and limiting increases in entitlement spending. It will nonetheless be important to phase in the fiscal adjustment gradually, for example, over the four years of the next presidential term, in order to moderate the output loss that would otherwise occur under current conditions of high unemployment combined with interest rates near zero. Moreover, Cline says the needed structural fiscal adjustment amounts to 3 percent of GDP and the component of overkill included in the fiscal cliff’s 5 percent of GDP adjustment should be avoided.

Cline and Williamson calculate a new set of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs) based on the new round of International Monetary Fund (IMF) projections in the spring 2012 World Economic Outlook. These show that on a trade-weighted basis the US dollar is now overvalued by 3–4 percent, while the Chinese renminbi is undervalued 3–4 percent. Both misalignments are much lower than in previous years (6 percent overvaluation and 16 percent undervaluation respectively a year ago). Because of the large roles of China and the United States in global imbalances, the GDP-weighted absolute value of divergence from FEERs has fallen from 8.4 percent in 2009 to 2.6 percentage points in April 2012. In contrast, large imbalances and misalignments have persisted in a number of smaller economies, including Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and Turkey on the deficit side and Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, and Taiwan on the surplus side.
While the world has probably made genuine progress in groping its way to more realistic exchange rate relationships, in particular through the 30 percent odd real revaluation of the renminbi since 2005 (40 percent real bilaterally against the dollar), the measurement of this progress is also influenced by the fact that in 2012 the IMF has revised downward its estimate of the size of the Chinese surplus in the out-years. But China remains a country with fast productivity growth in its tradable-goods sector, and accordingly there will be a continuing need for China to maintain appreciation in the future. Moreover, it is conceivable that the IMF has overadjusted for its past overestimates of China’s prospective surpluses and that the needed exchange rate changes are in fact larger than the current Cline-Williamson estimates. Apart from the imbalance centered on the United States and China, there is a second major problem with real exchange rates today: the overvaluation of the European periphery in terms of German costs. Despite the unavailability of depreciation as a corrective mechanism within the single currency, substantial reductions in current account deficits have been achieved since 2010 in Italy, Spain, and especially Portugal, but in Greece the deficit remains large.

The need for US corporate tax reform is blindingly obvious. Conservatives contend that the top corporate tax rate—whether measured in statutory or effective terms—is the second highest in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Liberals argue that the US corporate tax system is riddled with complex "loopholes," enabling many firms—whether or not incorporated—to pay less than their fair share.
Responding to these criticisms, Obama's White House and Treasury Department released a joint report entitled "The President's Framework for Business Tax Reform." Unfortunately, the report omits the detail needed to fully assess its proposals. But if the devil ever lives in the details, it is in the details of the tax code. Instead of details, the Framework report focuses on five elements of reform: the nominal and effective corporate tax rate, incentives for domestic manufacturing, taxation of international income, the tax code for small business, and the fiscal impact of proposed reforms. The report greatly exaggerates the revenue loss entailed by cutting the statutory corporate tax rate, and it proposes damaging new taxes on international business that would undermine US exports. Overall, the report unduly concentrates on manufacturing activity, while neglecting America's strength in services, the most prominent future driver of jobs, investment, and growth. Projected revenue gains are not large enough to help curb the rising debt-to-GDP ratio, but the report ducks any discussion of a national consumption tax.

In 2005, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi pushed his landmark bill through the Japanese Diet, aimed at reforming Japan Post, the giant state-owned enterprise that provides postal services and houses two huge financial arms, Japan Post Bank and Japan Post Insurance. The bill envisaged substantial privatization by 2017. Subsequent Japanese governments have toyed with the idea of reversing the Koizumi law, but in January 2012, it still seemed possible that Diet members would preserve essential features of the Koizumi reforms. As it turned out, the opposition Liberal Democratic Party (LDP)—putting current political advantage ahead of its past pro-reform stand—joined anti-reform forces in the ruling Democratic Party of Japan and the New Komeito Party. This alliance submitted the Bill to Partially Revise the Postal Privatization Law through the Diet on March 30, 2012. The anti-reform bill was passed by the Upper House on April 27, 2012, with only one absenting vote from the LDP, and became law. The revised law turns back the clock on the Koizumi reforms and will cloud Japan’s potential participation in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) talks.

The Doha Round is not the first multilateral negotiation to collapse under the weight of substantive disputes and tactical blunders, but revival this time requires a greater miracle than in the darkest days of the Tokyo or Uruguay Rounds. After near-death moments, those talks concluded with a big red bow tied around a comprehensive package. Ministers went home comforted that the next big negotiation would commence well after they left office. This time is different. There will be no red bow unless the Doha package is firmly joined to an immediate follow up round of talks—conducted under entirely different rules—both on old subjects that were badly neglected in the round and urgent new subjects that have surfaced since the round was launched in 2001.
Hufbauer and Schott propose a "grand bargain" that couples a significant harvest from the Doha agenda with the future negotiation of plurilateral agreements among WTO members willing to take rewarding, yet challenging, steps forward. The harvest should start—but not stop—with agreements that create minimal commercial pain for any member but deliver widespread gains: trade facilitation, duty-free, quota-free treatment of imports from least developed countries, phaseout of agricultural export subsidies, discipline of farm export controls, and reforms to dispute settlement. The harvest should then move to harder parts of the Doha Round—agreements that deliver significant benefits to some members but cause noticeable pain in others. The other side of the grand bargain is approval from the WTO membership for like-minded countries to negotiate deals between themselves. Five topics should be served up for plurilateral talks, as part of a grand bargain commencing in 2013: services liberalization, currency undervaluation, climate and energy, zero-for-zero tariffs coupled with disciplines on nontariff barriers, and state-owned enterprises.

Services trade continues to be the most dynamic part of world trade, and service sectors have long been the largest destination of foreign direct investment flows. Countries can reap huge potential gains through greater liberalization of services trade and investment, including increased job creation, greater economic efficiency, more variety, and lower costs of doing business. Despite these positive attributes, liberalization of services at the multilateral level has been stuck in the ill-fated Doha Development Round for over ten years now. Failure in the World Trade Organization (WTO) can cause long-term damage to the multilateral trading system because action on services liberalization will then inevitably become the exclusive province of regional trade agreements. The way forward within the WTO framework is through an International Services Agreement (ISA) in which self-selected WTO members voluntarily agree to new rules and market access commitments, but the agreement itself is open to all WTO members who are willing to accept its disciplines and commitments.
The authors consider the important questions of who will participate in an ISA and what the agreement itself might contain. It would be important to attract the largest and most successful emerging countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), which account for a sizeable share of world services trade, but this will probably not happen at the outset, because the BRICS have so far opposed services liberalization. The authors attempt to quantify the gains participating countries would reap from varying degrees of liberalization. They suggest a large range of possible export gains to the United States. At the lower end, using a standard partial equilibrium model, an ISA might facilitate a jump in US service exports by $14 billion annually. At the upper end, extrapolating from the scale of business services trade within US territory, the United States might realize export gains of $300 billion annually.

In his 2012 State of the Union address, President Obama claimed that "over a thousand Americans are working today because we stopped a surge in Chinese tires." The tire tariff case, decided by the president in September 2009, exemplifies his efforts to get China to "play by the rules" and serves as a plank in his larger platform of insourcing jobs to America. However, our analysis shows that, even on very generous assumptions about the effectiveness of the tariffs, the initiative saved a maximum of 1,200 jobs. Our analysis also shows that American buyers of car and truck tires pay a hefty price for this exercise of trade protection. According to our calculations, explained in this policy brief, the total cost to American consumers from higher prices resulting from safeguard tariffs on Chinese tires was around $1.1 billion in 2011. The cost per job saved (a maximum of 1,200 jobs by our calculations) was at least $900,000 in that year. Only a very small fraction of this bloated figure reached the pockets of tire workers. Instead, most of the money landed in the coffers of tire companies, mainly abroad but also at home.

Active accommodation of fiscal consolidations by monetary policy is controversial, as can be seen in current euro area discussions. While many observers acknowledge that there is usually a place for monetary accommodation in response to fiscal consolidation, a sequencing argument is often heard today that fiscal commitment must precede any loosening. Some analysts go further to suggest that toughness by central banks taking a hard line on adjustment is critical to inducing sustained fiscal stabilization. This policy brief looks at the recent historical record of central bank behavior vis-à-vis fiscal authorities, at least until the current crisis period, and whether accommodative approaches ahead of consolidations have proven dangerous or helpful. The authors also try to assess the market credibility of fiscal consolidations as a function of the central banks' monetary stance prior to fiscal consolidation. They find clear evidence of positive associations between the degree of monetary ease in advance of fiscal consolidation programs and both those programs' success and their market credibility.

For several years China has run current account surpluses that have been widely seen as the most serious source of global imbalances on the surplus side. Its exchange rate intervention limited appreciation of the currency and led to a buildup of external reserves to more than $3 trillion. Nonetheless, the surplus has fallen from 10 percent of GDP in 2007 to 2.8 percent in 2011, even though in September the International Monetary Fund projected the 2011 surplus at 5.2 percent of GDP and forecast a rebound to 7.2 percent of GDP by 2016. This policy brief examines whether the moderate 2011 surplus was a transitory aberration or a sign of a new trend. A statistical model explains the bulk of the reduction in the surplus as the consequence of the real exchange rate appreciation of about 20 percent that occurred from 2005–06 to 2009–10. Slow global growth, a rising oil deficit, and erosion in the capital income balance were additional causes. Projections based on this model and another used by the author indicate that if the exchange rate remains unchanged, the surplus is likely to be in a range of 2–4 percent of GDP in 2012–14 but rebound to 4 to 5 percent of GDP by 2017. If instead the government continues real appreciation at the 3 percent annual rate pursued since June 2010, by 2017 the current account would be approximately in balance.

The new, draconian sanctions introduced by the United States and the European Union to prevent Iran from earning money from its crude oil exports could pose a serious economic threat to oil-importing countries that also trade heavily with the US and EU economies. Nations such as China, South Korea, and Japan, which obtain significant amount of oil from Iran while enjoying large trade surpluses with the United States, are justifiably anxious. These countries and others worry that by pushing Iran from the global crude market, the new US and EU sanctions will disrupt oil markets, increase crude prices, and further slow global economic growth, which, at a minimum, would cut their export revenues. Saudi Arabia and other members of the Oil and Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) have indicated they would replace oil previously purchased from Iran, but these offers have done little to allay the apprehensions.
Verleger suggests a way to put real pressure on Iran while moderating or eliminating economic fallout for the US and EU economies and those of their trading partners: selling oil from the US Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR), which now holds far more oil than required by treaty obligations—more than 280 million surplus barrels. This strategic use of the SPR will increase the effectiveness of sanctions on Iran and ease the adjustment difficulties that confront US allies. The sales might also reduce any price pressure caused by removal of light Iranian crude from the market.
Contagion from Greece, together with domestic political uncertainty in Italy, caused interest rates on Italian sovereign debt to spike in the second half of 2011. By January 2012, however, the short-term rate had fallen sharply and the long-term rate had eased as well. But this improvement is by no means assured to continue. Cline examines the sensitivity of the Italian public debt outlook to a new higher interest rate environment, as well as to possible shortfalls from fiscal targets. In terms of long-term solvency, Italy is not close to a precipice and could keep its debt ratio from escalating even if the recent peak interest rates on its debt (about 7 1/2 percent) were to return and persist for a long time (but rise no higher). However, there is a considerable chance that Italy would face a severe liquidity squeeze under these circumstances. It thus behooves the official sector in Europe and internationally to move quickly to provide some credible lender of last resort vehicle in the immediate future.

Successive plans to restore confidence in the euro area have failed. A combination of misdiagnosis, lack of political will, and dysfunctional politics across 17 nations have all contributed to the failure so far to stem Europe's growing crisis. Proposals currently on the table also seem likely to fail. Boone and Johnson say the euro area faces two major problems: First, the introduction of sovereign credit risk has made nations and subsequently banks effectively insolvent unless they receive large-scale bailouts. Second, the ensuing credit crunch has exacerbated difficulties in the real economy, causing Europe's periphery to plunge into recession, thus increasing the financing needs of troubled nations well into the future.
Five measures are needed to enable the euro area to survive: (1) an immediate program to deal with excessive sovereign debt, (2) far more aggressive plans to reduce budget deficits and make peripheral nations "hypercompetitive" in the near future, (3) supportive monetary policy from the European Central Bank, (4) the introduction of mechanisms that credibly achieve long-term fiscal sustainability, and (5) institutional change that reduces the scope for excessive leverage and consequent instability in the financial sector.

Together, US federal and state governments impose almost the highest corporate tax rate found among advanced countries, 39 percent. Only Japan is fractionally higher. The high US rate has adverse consequences—lost investment, lost jobs, and less innovation—and goes a long way to explain slipping US competitiveness in the world economy. Some US-based companies that face competition from foreign-based companies think they have found the answer: by one means or another, persuade Congress to impose US taxation on the foreign companies. Instead of attacking the root problem—exceptionally high US corporate taxes—this "solution" seeks to handicap foreign competitors with the same burdensome tax system that handicaps US-based firms when they do business at home and abroad. If Congress embraces this piece of tax discrimination, US consumers who live in disaster-prone areas could suffer as well. Reinsurance written by foreign affiliates pays a major portion of claims in these regions. This portion of the insurance market will either shut down or premiums will rise to cover the new tax burden. There is no reason for the US Congress to go down the path of tax discrimination, harming relations with foreign partners and imposing additional costs on American consumers who live in high-risk areas. Instead, the US Congress should focus on corporate tax reform that puts US companies on the same competitive playing field as their foreign rivals.

Legislation to reform Japan Post is again gathering steam in Tokyo. A new postal bill is taking shape, in the form of amendments to the existing Postal Privatization Law dating from the Koizumi era—all put forward under the larger banner of post-earthquake reconstruction finance and the government's efforts to minimize consumption tax hikes. The latest version of "postal reform" legislation envisages "privatization" of Japan Post through the sale of up to two-thirds of government shares, but the government would retain at least one-third, effectively maintaining its controlling position. The real question is whether the latest act in this long-running drama will represent true reform or in fact will camouflage an entrenchment of Japan Post's formidable monopoly powers. Hufbauer and Muir say the new bill is squarely "antireform" and if passed into law would create a major hurdle to Japan's membership in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). Japan Post's operations not only violate the General Agreement on Trade in Services but also are at odds with the drafts on state-owned enterprises now being circulated among the current TPP parties and aspirants. The authors conclude by outlining the elements for a true Japan Post reform bill, one that would represent a step forward rather than a step back.

The economic and financial problems in the euro area are clearly serious and plentiful. An increasing number of commentators and economists have begun to question whether the euro can survive. There are only two alternatives. Europe can jettison the monetary union or it can adopt a complementary economic union. Every policymaker in Europe knows that the collapse of the euro would be a political and economic disaster for all and thus totally unacceptable. Europe's overriding political imperative to preserve the integration project will surely drive its leaders to ultimately secure the euro and restore the economic health of the continent.
The key is to observe what Europe does rather than what it says. At each critical stage of the crisis, both Germany and the European Central Bank have demonstrated they will pay whatever is necessary to preserve the euro area and avoid defaults (except possibly Greece). But neither can say they will provide unlimited bailouts because this would alleviate the pressure on the debtor countries to reform and weaken the bargaining position of each creditor group (northern European governments, ECB, private lenders, IMF) vis-à-vis the others as they allocate the costs of the bailouts. Europe's key political actors in Berlin, Frankfurt, Paris, Rome, Athens, and elsewhere will thus quite rationally exhaust all alternative options in searching for the best possible deal before at the last minute coming to an agreement. For all this turmoil, however, Europe is well on its way to completing a true economic and monetary union, and will emerge from the crisis much stronger as a result.

Energy-exporting countries have more at risk than any other participant in the world economy if the euro crisis plunges Europe into recession. These countries would likely experience greater losses in 2012 should Europe fail. Oil and natural gas prices would plummet, and the price collapse would likely be larger than the 2008–09 decline. Energy-exporting countries therefore should be working feverishly with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the European Union to rescue the euro. They, along with China and other large holders of foreign exchange reserves, should lend to the IMF to help it construct an emergency lending facility with capacity of more than €1 trillion. The fund, administered by the IMF, would be used to buy bonds issued by Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Ireland. The goal should be to bring interest rates on long-term bonds down to 3 percent. Simultaneously, efforts should be redoubled to fix the economic problems in the troubled nations and restore balance to their budgets. An energy price collapse would increase disruptions in energy-exporting countries, promote economic ills in some consuming nations, such as Canada, and almost certainly start yet a third, even more violent, economic cycle.

The constantly developing global financial system needs better risk assessments than Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs) have been collectively able to deliver during recent crises. More comprehensive public disclosure by issuers on their financial risks, which would not require intermediation by CRAs, is the best chance for new and better risk assessment methodologies and practices to emerge. To put it in a simplistic but concise way, what is needed is "a John Moody for the 21st century." CRAs themselves can perhaps be somewhat improved by adequate regulation and supervision, but public policy initiatives that focus only on CRAs are unlikely to adequately address the need for substantially better financial risk assessments. If real progress is to be made towards a better public understanding of financial risks, it will have to involve innovative approaches that even well-regulated CRAs, on the basis of recent experience, may not be the best placed to deliver.

The potential benefits to the US economy from Russia's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) are substantial, but the United States can enjoy them only if it grants Russia permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) status—by repealing application to Russia of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment. While congressional approval is not necessary for completion of Russian accession to the WTO, Congress needs to grant Russia PNTR to make it possible for US companies to take full advantage of the best available conditions of access to the Russian market for both trade and investment.
Åslund and Hufbauer calculate that US exports to Russia could double over the next five years—from $9 billion in 2010 to $19 billion—adding jobs in the services, agriculture, manufacturing, and high-tech sectors. More generally, with Russia's accession to the WTO and the United States granting PNTR to Russia, US-Russia commercial relations will be set on a sounder and friendlier footing, facilitating cooperation on national security and political issues. By strengthening the rules-based global trading system, WTO accession and PNTR will discourage Russia from undertaking protectionist measures.
President Barack Obama has stated that he looks forward to working with Congress "to end the application of the Jackson-Vanik amendment to Russia in order to ensure that American firms and American exporters will enjoy the same benefits of Russian WTO membership as their international competitors." It is imperative that Congress respond constructively in the same spirit of bipartisanship that led to the successful approval earlier this year of the Colombia, Korea, and Panama trade accords. Political wrangling, misjudgment, and miscalculations must not be allowed to cost the United States a significant new source of economic growth and cooperation in the future.

At the recent Cannes G-20 summit, the international monetary system (IMS) reform agenda, along with a number of other important issues, was hijacked by the European crisis. Nevertheless, the G-20 countries and various international institutions conducted an intensive process of review and discussion of the IMS via conferences, working groups, and reports. A year ago French President Sarkozy and other French government officials set the agenda for IMS reform to include five elements: surveillance of the global economy and financial system, the international lender-of-last-resort mechanisms (global financial safety nets), the management of global capital flows, reserve assets and reserve currencies, and IMS governance. Little progress was made on most of these topics. On surveillance there was only one surprise in the form of commitments by a few countries to allow their automatic stabilizers to operate in the current slowdown; on the lender-of-last-resort issues, there will only be marginal steps forward; and on the management of capital flows, the progress that has been achieved over the past several years has been loosely codified, which is a substantive achievement. Overall, the G-20 summit at Cannes resulted in some useful mutual education but not much in terms of concrete accomplishments.

The latest semiannual estimates of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs) by Peterson Institute researchers William R. Cline and John Williamson find that modest appreciation of the renminbi against the dollar, combined with higher inflation in China than in the United States, has narrowed the undervaluation of the Chinese currency from 16 percent in April to 11 percent in late October. However, the bilateral undervaluation of the renminbi against the dollar still amounts to 24 percent; this is the rise in the renminbi that would be required to achieve multilateral equilibrium if all currencies were to move to their FEERs.
The dollar remains at about the same overvaluation as in April, about 9 percent.  The Mexican peso has become more undervalued than the renminbi.  The safe-haven effect boosted the Japanese yen and the Swiss franc, and both countries intervened to resist appreciation.  Because the yen had become overvalued but the franc remains undervalued, Japanese intervention was justifiable but Swiss intervention was not.
In the case of the euro, the currency was approximately at equilibrium by late October at $1.41 (although it would need to appreciate by 6 percent bilaterally against the dollar if all currencies moved to their FEERs). A key implication is that steep depreciation of the euro in an attempt to boost European growth would be destabilizing globally; it would move the euro area into major undervaluation and provoke even greater dollar overvaluation. A special examination of imbalances within the euro area shows that both Greece and Portugal might need to depreciate in real effective terms by 20–25 percent to cut back their current account deficits of more than 8 percent of GDP (2011), although in an alternative diagnosis they might not need real depreciation if the International Monetary Fund's forecast of current account equilibrium for both by 2016 is valid. Statistical tests confirm that for euro area economies under stress, however, public debt levels rather than current account imbalances have greater influence on government bond spreads.
The government of Egypt recently stated that external financial assistance is necessary in the present economic situation and has expressed a strong preference for receiving it in part via debt relief. Williamson and Khan explore whether there is a case for debt relief and if so what form this relief should take. They review the cases of Egypt in an earlier era and other middle-income countries—Iraq, Argentina, and Nigeria—that benefited from debt relief, as well as the loan guarantees provided by the United States to Israel, to draw out the lessons and implications for Egypt. In terms of reducing debt service payments, debt relief was certainly successful in each of the countries reviewed.
The authors conclude with recommendations for a new debt relief program for Egypt. The traditional approach to debt relief would be through a Paris Club debt rescheduling. The United States could call for the Paris Club to meet to consider Egyptian debt, use its influence to persuade the Egyptians to request a meeting, and then call on its partners to make offers similar to those that President Obama already made in his speech on May 19, 2011. A more promising approach might be for the United States to use its convening power to persuade other countries ("Friends of Egypt") to make debt relief arrangements similar to those that the United States has already offered to Egypt. Complementary to this process, the United States could also urge its partners to make loan guarantees similar to those that it itself has offered.

Public opinion holds that large corporations should pay a higher statutory tax rate than other business firms, and enjoy fewer deductions in computing their taxable income. Americans and their representatives in Congress have long entertained the notion that a corporate check paid to the US Treasury means "somebody else" pays the tax, conveniently forgetting that the money has to come from someplace. As the law is now written, the largest corporations (those with assets of $2.5 billion or more) pay about three-fourths of US corporate income taxes, even though they account for just 57 percent of corporate net income. Discriminatory tax burdens on one group of firms drive scarce capital and entrepreneurial energy to less productive firms, penalizing the entire economy. If the targets of discrimination are the nation's largest firms (the norm in the United States) the country will find it harder to compete on a global scale in industries that require dedicated research for decades, industries that exhibit huge scale economies, and industries that network across national borders. Whatever the relative contribution of large and small companies to gross or net job growth, the bottom line for American workers—and the American economy as a whole—is that it is important to ensure that the United States remains a favorable location for US-based multinational corporations to do business.

On July 21, 2011, the heads of government of the euro area announced a new plan to address the Greek debt crisis. This policy brief presents a simulation exercise that examines whether the new arrangements are likely to provide a sustainable solution. The analysis focuses on four key measures: gross debt relative to GDP; net debt relative to GDP; net interest payments relative to GDP; and amortization of medium- and long-term debt coming due during the year in question, relative to GDP. The new Greek package shows prospective future progress on all four measures, and Greek debt looks much more sustainable after the package than before. In the central baseline through 2020 after the July 2011 package, gross debt peaks at 175 percent of GDP in 2012, then falls to 113 percent by 2020; net debt falls from 121 percent of GDP in 2011 to 69 percent by 2020; purchase of private-sector involvement (PSI) collateral boosts assets from €76 billion in 2010 to about €150 billion by 2015; the interest burden falls from 7.2 percent of GDP in 2011 to 5.2 percent by 2020; amortization falls from 12 percent of GDP in 2011 to 6.5 percent by 2015, 0.5 percent in 2020; the primary surplus rises from –0.8 percent of GDP in 2011 to +6.4 percent by 2014 and after; and the average interest rate on public debt plateaus in a manageable range of about 4.5 percent. These results suggest that Greece can manage its sovereign debt under the new package so long as it meets the fiscal adjustment targets. So far the evidence is that Greek political leaders are willing to take the extensive and unpopular measures necessary to do so.

Allie E. Bagnall and Edwin M. Truman examine the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds (IFSWF) report, which claims to be "a solid, initial step toward a better understanding of the IFSWF and of the Santiago Principles," and find this to be largely true, with a few limitations. The report, released July 7, 2011, is a self-assessment of the voluntary compliance of 21 member sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) with the Generally Accepted Principles and Practices of SWFs, issued in October 2008. Bagnall and Truman find that the extent of compliance with the Santiago Principles is somewhat exaggerated.  In addition, some of the 21 funds have substantially lower rates of compliance than others, which is not reported. However, the report is frank about many of the issues that arise with respect to the interpretation of its results, for example regarding the application of the principles on investment policies and on nonfinancial restrictions on SWF investment decisions. Ultimately, presentation may obscure some results in the IFSWF report, but Bagnall and Truman find the report credible and admirable.

Europe’s efforts to stabilize its finances are failing, and the region needs to prepare for widespread restructuring of sovereign and bank debt. Peter Boone and Simon Johnson argue that Europe’s financial system has relied on a policy of protecting creditors from default and has thus spread pervasive moral hazard—a presumption by creditors that they will not take losses on their loans to Greece and other ailing countries. The authors argue that this situation is no longer tenable and examine three possible scenarios for the coming months as the sovereign debt crisis evolves. Under the first scenario, the euro area would try to reassert its commitment to avoid defaults and inflation. This continuation of the moral hazard regime would require severe austerity for Greece and other countries on the periphery of the euro area. The second scenario involves elimination of the moral hazard regime. The euro area would admit that some sovereigns have too much debt. A series of debt restructurings would follow. The final scenario would be for policymakers to continue to contradict themselves by promising selective defaults or restructurings of some countries’ debts while maintaining that they can ensure the stability of the rest of the euro area. But the authors argue that it is an illusion to believe that selective restructuring would not introduce contagion. Such an approach would result in panic, massive capital flight, and disorderly defaults. The ensuing chaos would in turn lead to a negatively charged political atmosphere that would make consensus nearly impossible.

In the past four years, rising world food prices and the global economic downturn increased the ranks of the world’s food insecure from 848 million to 925 million by September 2010, reversing decades of slow yet steady progress in reducing hunger. While the human costs have been considerable, the political consequences have been significant as well, fueling concerns of two skeptical groups, Neo-Malthusians and food sovereignty advocates. Hendrix assesses the claims of both. On the Neo-Malthusian position, he finds that while population growth and economic development contribute somewhat to price increases, there are few structural, resource-based impediments to increasing aggregate agricultural production. The biggest near-term threats to food security are not dwindling agricultural inputs and agricultural trade, but rather the familiar problems of poverty and political barriers to market access—in particular, the distortions created by agricultural policy in the United States and European Union. A robust trading system is the best way to address current food security problems. In light of forecast changes in global patterns of agricultural productivity, a robust trading system will become even more important to ensuring that a world undergoing climate change will be able to feed itself.

In this Policy Brief, PIIE Visiting Fellow Nicolas Véron provides a comprehensive analysis of the strategic challenges facing the attempt to harmonize the world's accounting practices through the global spread of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). After taking stock of the initial successes of IFRS adoption, he identifies unsustainable features in the current governance framework of the IFRS Foundation, the organization that hosts IFRS standard-setting, and advocates reform to make the IFRS Foundation accountable not only to individual governments but also to the global investor community. He also proposes a variety of incentives for individual jurisdictions to converge towards IFRS, as such convergence looks set to be more gradual than had been envisaged by the IFRS Foundation in the past.

As US gasoline prices approached $4 a gallon in spring 2011, energy security moved to the forefront of the American political debate. Politicians have been quick to offer silver bullet solutions to lower gas prices and make America more energy secure. Houser and Mohan analyze the various recent policy proposals, from expanded offshore drilling to new vehicle efficiency standards, and compare their effects on US oil imports, US oil demand, gasoline prices, and energy expenditures over the 2011–2035 period. They find that despite recent political rhetoric, when it comes to energy security there is no policy panacea. Current proposals vary widely in the time frame, magnitude, and nature of their impact. Rather than debate whether expanded domestic production, improved efficiency, or development of oil alternatives is the right course to take, the United States needs to start moving down all three roads simultaneously to significantly alter the country’s energy trajectory. An "all of the above" strategy is required, which combines increased domestic production (important in the near term) with long-term investments in energy-efficient vehicles and oil alternatives, whether electric, natural gas, or biofuels. A carbon tax, while still a long shot politically, would deliver further energy security gains and help reduce the US deficit in the process. But even if all proposals currently on the table are adopted, the US will remain dependent on the international oil market for decades to come. Therefore Washington needs a strategy for improving the stability and reliability of that market, something missing from the current policy debate.

In the fall of 2008, Central and Eastern Europe became a flashpoint in the global financial crisis. The positive surprise, however, is that after about two years, the crisis in the region had more or less abated. Public attention moved from Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania to the PIIGS (Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Spain). The issue was no longer why Latvia must devalue but what Greece could learn from Latvia. What lessons can be drawn from the resolution of the financial crisis in Eastern Europe for the rest of the European Union and the world at large?
Crisis resolution in these countries was decisive and successful, and the entire region save Romania had returned to economic growth by the second half of 2010. The financial crisis in Eastern Europe has been remarkable for everything that did not happen. There was no significant reaction against globalization, capitalism, the European Union, or the euro. No major strikes or social unrest erupted, while the population rose against populism and unjustified state privileges. Politically and financially, crony businessmen were the biggest losers, whereas the political winners were the moderate but resolute center-right forces. The sensible public wanted decisive action from their leaders to resolve their problems. The ideological wind was clearly liberal and free market but also socially responsible, favoring a somewhat purer market economy and a moderate retrenchment of the social welfare state. It has proven politically possible to cut public expenditures, salaries, and employment, as well as rationalize health care and education.
In the end, this crisis will likely benefit both Eastern and Western Europe and thus the European Union. Western Europe will have to learn from Eastern Europe, erasing the current division between first- and second-class members within the European Union. Thanks to the East Europeans, the West Europeans have slashed their corporate profit tax rates and have also been enticed to liberalize their labor markets. Now, they will also learn fiscal policy from the east.

Doha Round "doctors" have prescribed a wide range of treatments for what ails the trade talks, ranging from placebo pills to euthanasia. In essence, the treatment options fall into three broad categories: (1) declare victory and sign the deal "on the table"; (2) "declare failure and go home"; or (3) recognize that the talks cannot conclude in the current environment and that the Doha Round needs a "time-out." Under either option 2 or 3, US officials would receive a large share of the blame for Doha's woes. So what should the United States do now to deflect such criticism, minimize damage to the World Trade Organization, and advance US trading interests? Schott recommends that the United States needs to keep open the multilateral option while accelerating bilateral and regional trade initiatives. The former requires, as a practical matter, making a down payment (in the form of provisional implementation of specific reforms) on a future Doha package that is more ambitious and balanced than what is now "on the table" in Geneva; the latter requires working particularly with the European Union, Brazil, and India to resolve problems that can subsequently be "locked in" WTO schedules.
Sharp reductions in tariffs and quotas have propelled dramatic growth in global trade over the past several decades. Often overlooked, however, are the costs associated with trade logistics. In many countries logistics costs are greater deterrents to trade than remaining tariffs. Studies show that trade facilitation—i.e., the reduction of logistics costs—could increase annual global manufactured exports by as much as $400 billion. Hufbauer and Wong focus on two barriers that specifically hamper low-value shipments: (1) an unduly restrictive de minimis exemption from customs duty for low-value imports and (2) an unduly low "informal entry" threshold, the dividing line that determines whether the shipment requires just a little paperwork or a lot of paperwork to clear the entry process. The authors' estimates for the United States reveal that the payoff associated with raising thresholds and reducing "exceptions" could be significant. An increase in the de minimis threshold to $800 would generate net gains of around $17 million annually, taking into account the cost savings at each stage of the delivery chain and the revenue not collected by the customs authority. The saving of paperwork costs alone on de minimis entries might be $33 million a year. Raising the informal entry threshold to $2,500, and slashing the number of "exceptions," could generate net gains of $81 million per year. For emerging-market economies, potential gains from higher de minimis and informal entry thresholds are very likely more substantial relative to the size of their economies. Improving logistics and raising thresholds for low-value shipments are a powerful and relatively inexpensive means of enhancing the trading system.
See also the release event for this policy brief.

Trade finance will play a crucial role in President Barack Obama's goal of doubling US exports by 2015. Almost 90 percent of exports depend on trade finance in some form-direct credit, credit insurance, or loan guarantees. Even though official export credit agencies (ECAs), including the US Export-Import Bank (Ex-Im Bank), play a small part in the whole scheme of export finance, they occupy a crucial niche. They are "lenders of last resort," taking risks shunned by the private market. Ex-Im Bank is up for reauthorization in 2011, so this is a good time to review its prospects and mandate. As new authorization legislation is drafted, the authors recommend that Congress address seven policy issues: (1) enlarge the Ex-Im Bank's funding level to the point where it can finance 5 percent of US exports of goods and services; (2) draw private banks to play a more active role in financing exports of small and medium-sized enterprises; (3) cut the local content requirement from the bank's current level of 85 percent to a maximum of 50 percent; (4) authorize the Ex-Im Bank to support both service components of merchandise exports and stand-alone services exports in a manner similar to the approach of other ECAs; (5) repeal the cargo preference requirement; (6) move the determination of "adverse economic impact" to the US International Trade Commission and limit the review to countries that are subject to antidumping duties, countervailing duties, and safeguard orders; and (7) use concerted pressure to bring China into the OECD Arrangement on Officially Supported Export Credits.

This policy brief updates Cline and Williamson's estimates of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs) to April 2011. Most currencies appear to have been reasonably close to their FEERs in April 2011. The most important exceptions are China, on the weak side, and the United States, on the strong side. The countries that need to seek weaker effective rates are those with large current account deficits: Australia and New Zealand, South Africa, Turkey, (marginally) Poland and Hungary, and the United States and Brazil. These are countries with floating exchange rates that have been pushed to an overvalued level by (in most cases) capital mobility and the carry trade, reinforced in the case of the United States by the dollar's role as the currency to which many other countries peg combined with the decision of some other countries to peg their rates at an undervalued level. The countries that need to revalue their effective rates are primarily Asian: China and countries that make it a priority to avoid losing competitiveness versus China (Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, and Taiwan). The authors' calculations show the need for a slightly larger effective revaluation of the Chinese currency, the renminbi, this year (17.6 percent) than last (15.3 percent) and a larger appreciation of the renminbi in terms of the dollar (28.5 percent rather than 24.2 percent).

Reform of the international monetary system was placed on the agenda of the Group of 20 (G-20) a year ago at the initiative of the incoming French leadership of the G-20. On November 4, 2011 in Cannes, France, the G-20 leaders will announce their conclusions and agreements after a year and half of intense dialogue and debate. The discussions cover (1) surveillance of the global economy and financial system, (2) international lender of last resort mechanisms, (3) capital flows and financial pressures, (4) the currency and reserve asset system, and (5) governance of the international monetary system. While the governance issue, in the form of governance of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), is not explicitly on the agenda of the G-20 leaders, the resignation of Dominique Strauss-Kahn as managing director of the IMF has placed it on the agenda with high priority.
Based on the evidence to date, Truman expects that by the end of 2011, the result will produce a barely passing grade on substance-below B on the inflated scale of grades today-but an A for effort. As long as the process achieves the A for effort via a thorough examination of the full range of reform issues, the shortfall on substance is not crucial, and he welcomes being proved wrong on substance. More would be desirable, but the international monetary system will continue to evolve.

China's global economic dominance has changed the dynamic of the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations, which has been languishing for nearly 10 years. Whereas earlier lack of enthusiasm from the private sector debilitated Doha, today fear of competition from a dominant China inhibits progress. Progress now hinges critically on greater market opening not in services or agriculture but in manufacturing, where China is a large supplier to all the major markets, and its presence has grown significantly over the course of the Doha Round negotiations. China looms especially large in the markets of major trading partners in sectors where protection is greatest. China's share in these sectors in Japan is over 70 percent, in Korea over 60 percent, in Brazil about 55 percent, in the United States, Canada, and the European Union about 50 percent each. Liberalization under the Doha agenda, especially in the politically charged, high-tariff sectors, is increasingly about other countries opening their markets to Chinese exports.
China has achieved trade dominance to a large extent through its successful growth strategy, but the problem is the strong political perception that China's export success has been achieved, and continues to be sustained, in part by an undervalued exchange rate. It seems unlikely and politically unrealistic to expect China's trading partners to open further their markets to China when China is perceived as de facto (via the undervalued exchange rate) imposing an import tariff and export subsidy not just in selected manufacturing sectors but across the board. Unless Chinese currency policy changes significantly, and unless there can be credible checks on the use of such policies in the future, concern will remain in many countries, both industrial and emerging-market, about the increased competition from China that liberalization under Doha might unleash. Instead of blaming one another for the current impasse, countries need to confront Chinese trade dominance to revive Doha or look beyond it.

The US budget outlook has the makings of a fiscal disaster, but it is the beginning of economic challenges, not the end. Among other challenges, a tax system that discourages business and erodes American competitiveness ranks high. The United States lags well behind other advanced countries, not to mention China, in reforming its corporate tax regime. Instead, over past decades, the United States has sought to make up through a high statutory tax rate, especially on multinational corporations (MNCs), what has been lost though a host of exemptions, deductions, and credits. The combination of a high corporate tax rate and its worldwide reach makes the United States-despite all its positive attributes-one of the least favored locations from the standpoint of business taxation. Unlike all other major economies, which limit corporate taxation to income earned within the national boundaries (territorial taxation), the United States hobbles its MNCs by taxing their worldwide income. Hufbauer and Wong caution that solutions to the looming fiscal crisis could make a bad corporate tax system even worse. To forestall this outcome, they advocate four measures: (1) meaningful caps on the growth of entitlement spending (Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security); (2) a national consumption tax to narrow the federal budget deficit to around 2.2 percent of GDP and to arrest the rise of public debt at about 88 percent of GDP; (3) a deep cut in the statutory corporate tax rate to 20 percent or lower, coupled with the elimination of exemptions, deductions and credits so as to broaden the tax base; and (4) the explicit adoption of a territorial system for taxing business income. The authors recognize that a national consumption tax is deeply unpopular with many Americans. However, the United States remains the only OECD country (and one of the very few countries in the world) that has not implemented a national consumption tax to fund its ambitious social programs and military commitments. Unless these programs and commitments can be downsized to a degree seldom seen in history, circumstances may compel the United States to choose between a competitive economy and a national consumption tax. 

It has been 80 years since John Maynard Keynes first proposed a plan that would have disciplined persistent surplus countries. But the Keynes Plan, like the subsequent Volcker Plan in 1972-74, was defeated by the major surplus country of the day (the United States and Germany, respectively), and today China (not to mention Japan or Germany) exhibits no enthusiasm for new revisions of these ideas.
Williamson evaluates the two earlier attempts and several new proposals now on the table. Morris Goldstein proposes using the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to discipline surplus countries. Countries showing large and persistent current account surpluses would receive a Fund mission with the purpose of judging whether the country had a misaligned exchange rate. Penalties would depend on the size and persistence of any misalignment the Fund diagnosed. Aaditya Mattoo and Arvind Subramanian propose that countries could bring a case for unfair trade through currency undervaluation to the World Trade Organization (WTO) dispute settlement system. The WTO would seek to establish the facts of the matter from the IMF. C. Fred Bergsten proposes that either a reserve currency country or the IMF itself should be able to engage in counter-intervention to push up the value of a currency that is being deliberately held down to an undervalued rate through intervention. US Secretary of the Treasury Timothy Geithner, echoing ideas of the Korean G-20 summit hosts and endorsed by Yi Gang, a vice governor of the People's Bank of China, has proposed that members of the G-20 should commit themselves to limit their current account imbalances to a maximum of 4 percent of GDP. Daniel Gros and Gary Hufbauer have advanced other ways of disciplining surplus countries, by limiting or taxing the assets that surplus countries can hold.
Williamson suggests incorporating ideas from the various proposals into a feasible mechanism for disciplining surplus countries. He finds the Mattoo-Subramanian proposal most attractive for typical countries: They focus attention on the exchange rate rather than reserve holdings, seek to use the IMF in an area where it undoubtedly has expertise, but also exploit the greatest success in international cooperation in recent years, namely the dispute settlement mechanism of the WTO. To deal with the problem when a member of a monetary union-which by definition does not have an independent exchange rate-has an excessive surplus, Williamson suggests running the Goldstein proposal in parallel-perhaps operated by the European Central Bank rather than the IMF, and with the focus on the level of demand rather than the exchange rate.

The European Union will have to put forth significant effort to develop its own financial regulation system in the absence of strong momentum towards global standards. Nicolas Véron compares US and EU regulatory responses to the global financial crisis and then breaks down the specific areas of reform in which the European Union has acted or is expected to act. The successful creation of the European Supervisory Authorities is the main achievement so far and could lead over time to a distinct European financial regulatory philosophy. 

The central challenge facing the global economy and financial system today is the failure of countries to limit the negative effects of their policies on other countries and on global economic and financial stability. The most prominent manifestations of this challenge are the balance-of-payments adjustment process and the notorious asymmetry therein, spillovers from other countries' financial-sector policies such as those involved in the crisis of 2007-10, and the prospect of sustained unbalanced growth in the global economy with some countries overheating and others facing substantial excess capacity.
Truman proposes an approach to strengthen International Monetary Fund (IMF) surveillance over the economic and financial policies of its member countries-an approach that builds on members' IMF obligations with a view to producing significant promise of affecting their policy choices. His proposed approach has five integrated components: (1) updated obligations of IMF membership, (2) development of a set of norms to guide members in meeting those obligations, (3) a process to apply judgment in monitoring compliance with those obligations via the use of the norms, (4) accountability in the application of such judgment based on transparency, and (5) potential consequences for member countries that are judged not to have complied with their obligations. The crux of the approach is to enhance IMF members' obligations to contribute to global economic and financial stability and to strengthen IMF surveillance of those obligations through the use of norms and a transparent peer review process that leads to improved policies and outcomes.

On December 3, 2010, the United States and South Korea agreed to incremental changes to the Korea-US Free Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA) that greatly increase prospects for Congressional ratification next year. Immediate tariff cuts on autos and light trucks have been deferred a few years. Korea agreed to auto regulatory reforms that should help mitigate existing problems and preclude the introduction of new nontariff barriers. Minor adjustments also were made to the phase-out of Korean pork tariffs, the duration of US L-1 visas, and the grace period before Korea has to implement a pharmaceutical "patent linkage" system. The new deal should provide gains of more than $20 billion in bilateral trade. The pact also should have positive knock-on effects on the awakening global trade talks and on negotiations for a Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Europe's financial market contagion is infecting systemically important eurozone members, causing a rise in demands that European policymakers make greater strides toward solutions. While Jacob Funk Kirkegaard believes that the European Union will do "whatever it takes" to save the euro and the eurozone, he argues that powerful political constraints prevent EU leaders from making optimal decisions. Europe can get through the current crisis by producing a compromise among member states in the form of a permanent European Stability Mechanism (ESM) with an option to issue a conditional Eurobond, which would aid eurozone members suffering asymmetric economic shocks in return for taking domestic reforms to return to a sustainable fiscal path. An ESM with a conditional Eurobond option offers a less clear-cut solution than a full fiscal union, a straightforward Eurobond, European Central Bank money-printing, or a breakup of the eurozone.

More than a dozen countries, including Brazil, China, India, Japan, and Korea, have been intervening in the foreign exchange market to prevent their currencies from appreciating. There are fears that the second dose of quantitative easing in the United States (dubbed QE2) may worsen currency appreciation. These developments raise the prospect of a currency war, which the Group of Twenty (G-20) fears is gathering steam. Because many countries are simultaneously seeking to improve their balance of payments position, many are seeking a more competitive exchange rate. The laws of mathematics mean that some must be disappointed: A weaker exchange rate of one country implies a stronger rate of some other country or countries.
Cline and Williamson argue that any agreement reached at the G-20 summit in Seoul to prevent an exchange rate war should be based on a distinction between countries with overvalued and undervalued currencies. Any accord should be designed to seek appreciation of the latter but not to debar the former from taking actions to prevent their currencies from becoming even more overvalued. Countries that are already overvalued on an effective basis-primarily floating emerging-market economies, but also Australia and New Zealand-should not be condemned for resisting further appreciation. But if a currency is substantially undervalued and the country is aggressively engaging in intervention to prevent appreciation, it is reasonable to judge that its intervention is unjustifiable. The authors show that a handful of high-surplus economies are intervening in such a fashion: China, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, Switzerland, and Taiwan. The currencies of these economies are substantially undervalued, and their current account surpluses are correspondingly excessive, pointing clearly to the desirability of currency revaluation by these countries. It would be very wrong for the G-20 to condemn all countries that are trying to prevent their exchange rates from appreciating. One needs to ask which currencies are undervalued and concentrate on preventing them from intervening and tightening capital controls.

The European Union has thus far done an adequate job of preventing the Greek sovereign debt crisis from getting out of hand, but it is clear that the European Union's fiscal surveillance framework failed both before and during the Great Recession. It is crucial that European leaders develop a solid long-term plan for reforming the EU fiscal policy and surveillance framework. Reform of the EU fiscal surveillance framework is feasible as early as this December, based on work that has already started in Brussels, among other places.The May 2010 Greek bailout brought a high degree of moral hazard into the eurozone. Minimizing this moral hazard-and maintaining public confidence in the European Union-will necessitate several policy reforms. Bearing in mind that long-term reform of the EU policy framework and the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) will both take place in a postcrisis European economy where Germany is significantly empowered at times of crisis, the European Union is likely to have to ultimately submit to most German demands. Jacob Funk Kirkegaard points to three specific ways Europe can keep moral hazard in check: (1) attach strict ex post conditionality to bailouts (this has already been enacted); (2) reform the SGP to include strict ex ante fiscal rules; and (3) create a "eurozone sovereign debt restructuring mechanism." 

Adam S. Posen presents his view on the role of monetary policy in the global economic recovery, in particular in the large Western countries, and whether the major central banks in the United Kingdom and beyond should be doing more in the coming months. Posen argues that monetary policy should continue to be aggressive about promoting recovery, and further quantitative easing should be undertaken. Policymakers face a clear and sustained uphill battle, in which monetary ease has an ongoing role to play, even if it may not deliver the desired sustained recovery on its own. In every major economy, actual output has fallen so much versus where trend growth would have put them, and trend growth has not been above potential for long enough as yet, that there remains a significant gap between what the economy could be producing at full employment and what it currently produces. Thus, policymakers should not settle for weak growth out of misplaced fear of inflation. If price stability is at risk over the medium term, it is on the downside.
There are, however, some very serious risks if policy errors are made by tightening prematurely or even by loosening insufficiently. The risks that Posen believes the United Kingdom and other major Western countries face now are those of sustained low growth and near deflation turning into a self-fulfilling prophecy (as in Japan in the 1990s and in the United States and Europe in the 1930s) and/or of inducing a political reaction that could undermine these countries' long-run stability and prosperity. Inaction by central banks could ratify decisions both by businesses to lastingly shrink the economy's productive capacity and by investors to avoid risk and prefer cash. These tendencies are already present, and insufficient monetary response is likely to worsen them. The combination of these risks with the potential attainable gains motivates Posen's call for additional monetary policy stimulus.

The KORUS FTA was signed on June 30, 2007, but has not yet been sent to Congress for ratification. US concerns about auto and beef trade are the main stumbling blocks. At the Toronto G-20 Summit in June 2010, Presidents Obama and Lee Myung Bak tasked their officials to find solutions by the November Seoul G-20 Summit. If a deal is struck, implementing legislation could be submitted to Congress in early 2011.
This paper assesses the problems and potential solutions to these problems and options for legislative action. The author concludes that, once submitted, the KORUS FTA will be approved for three reasons-all related to actions taken by other countries that could adversely affect US commercial and security interests in the Asia-Pacific region. The first reason is to demonstrate support for a strong ally facing North Korean aggression. Neither country wants to let a few provisions in a major trade agreement create friction in a strategically important bilateral alliance. The second reason is to secure a level playing field for US exporters in the Korean market. The imminent signing of the Korea-EU FTA, an agreement modeled on and largely comparable to the KORUS FTA, increases the urgency of Congressional action on the KORUS FTA since US and EU exports compete for sales in the Korean market. The third reason relates to the ability of US officials to advance US economic interests through an effective trade policy. Implementing KORUS is important to help maintain the credibility of US trade initiatives that seek to boost US exports, constrain Chinese economic influence in the Asia-Pacific region, and advance overall US foreign policy and security interests.

Two major shifts in the global financial regulatory landscape are likely impeding harmonization of global financial regulation: financial multipolarity, meaning the rise of emerging-market economies such as China and the impact of this trend on decision-making at the global level, and financial reregulation, or the trend toward stronger regulation of financial systems to buttress financial stability, particularly in developed economies. As a result, the ambitious objectives initially set by the G-20 leaders in the wake of the unprecedented financial crisis have so far not resulted in major international breakthroughs, warranting a reconsideration of the global financial regulatory agenda. Consistent regulatory choices across the globe are preferable, but achieving consistency involves difficult political and economic tradeoffs. Continued global capital-market integration can no longer be taken for granted. Policymakers should prioritize four key components to ensure the sustainability of financial integration: (1) strong global public institutions to provide a comprehensive analytical picture, set authoritative standards, and foster and monitor the consistency of regulatory practice; (2) globally consistent financial information; (3) new arrangements to enable and supervise globally integrated capital-market infrastructure; and (4) creating a level playing field for global capital-market intermediaries by addressing competitive distortions.

The 1987 Montreal Protocol to address ozone layer depletion was a pivotal agreement in the history of global environmental negotiations. It established a process that remains an important precedent for dealing with global environmental problems, including global warming. What made the negotiation of that agreement such an iconic event, and what useful lessons does it hold for climate change negotiators? Richard Smith cites a number offactors that were critical to the success of the Montreal Protocol. For example: (1) the United States played a leadership role from the beginning, including banning the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) in most aerosols and appointing a chief negotiator with responsibility for developing the U.S. position well before the negotiations began; (2) from the outset all countries that were parties to the agreement, both developed and developing countries, made specific commitments to reduce the production and use of ozone-depleting substances; and (3) the protocol set up a procedure for regularly reviewing and revising its provisions at follow-up meetings, thus accommodating new information rapidly and efficiently. A central lesson that climate change negotiators should learn from the Montreal Protocol is that it set a process in motion, which ultimately led to all parties to the agreement making the necessary commitments to arrest and eventually reverse the deterioration of the stratospheric ozone layer. Clearly, climate change negotiators face a more complex and far-reaching challenge today. The phaseout of ozone-depleting chemicals and related infrastructure involved major industries such as refrigeration, electronics, fire fighting, and aerosols and cost billions of dollars. But reducing greenhouse gas emissions will require fundamentally rethinking the present carbon-based societies and taking steps that will affect virtually every aspect of economic activity. Despite this significant difference in the impact on the economic structure of the countries concerned, however, there are similarities between the two challenges, and climate change negotiators would be well advised to reflect on the Montreal Protocol and the lessons that can be learned from it.

The impact of China's exchange rate on both its current account balance and the US-China bilateral trade balance is considerable. A 1 percent rise in the real effective exchange rate would cause a reduction in China's current account surplus of 0.30 to 0.45 percent of GDP. A 10 percent real effective appreciation would bring China's current account surplus down by roughly $170 billion to $250 billion annually with a corresponding improvement in the US current account balance ranging from $22 billion to $63 billion annually. William R. Cline also warns that the increasing trend for China's current account surplus, combined with the negative trend for the US deficit, indicate that adjustments accomplished through exchange rate correction at any one time will have a tendency to erode unless the renminbi successively appreciates by around 2 percent annually to reflect its rapid productivity growth. Special Chinese efforts to shift the economy away from external to domestic demand are important complements of exchange rate adjustment, without which the long-term trend toward a rising trade surplus could cause excess demand to grow and increase inflationary pressures on the economy.

The three NAFTA signatories have a shared interest in harmonizing climate change policy, and while they have made steps in that direction, there is still much that can be done to promote renewable energy development and other measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Authors Jeffrey J. Schott and Meera Fickling examine channels for energy and environmental cooperation among the three North American countries in light of limited progress in international climate talks and scaled back energy legislation being vetted in the US Senate. Suggestions include: harmonizing renewable energy standards and trading of renewable electricity credits, improving cross-border transmission capacity between the United States and Mexico, and using NAFTA institutions for data collection and monitoring of regional climate policies and for capacity building in Mexico. 

The tools and mechanisms with which emerging-market countries insure themselves against volatile capital flows are in a state of flux. Most emerging-market countries had accumulated an unprecedented level of international reserves before the 2008 global financial crisis. The crisis itself led to a large increase in International Monetary Fund (IMF) resources and the introduction of a new lending facility, the Flexible Credit Line. Meanwhile, some progress was made toward transforming the Chiang Mai Initiative into an Asian Monetary Fund, and the Greek debt crisis even prompted calls for the creation of a European Monetary Fund. How have emerging-market countries dealt with capital flow volatility in the current crisis? What is the appropriate level of reserves for emerging-market countries? How can international crisis-lending and liquidity-provision arrangements be improved? What role can financial regulation and capital controls play in dealing with volatile capital flows? Olivier Jeanne discusses these and other important questions that are useful to keep in mind when thinking about the reform of international liquidity provision for emerging-market countries to deal with volatile capital flows. Jeanne concludes that the IMF and the international community should make more efforts to establish normative rules for the appropriate level of prudential reserves in emerging-market and developing countries and actively develop with its members a code of good practice for prudential capital controls.
On May 31, 2010, a majority of the Lower House of the National Diet of Japan approved legislation that would reverse a decade's worth of effort to fully privatize key subsidiaries of Japan Post Holdings Co. Ltd. Besides postal services, the state-run postal system offers banking and insurance services, through Japan Post Bank (JPB) and Japan Post Insurance (JPI), respectively. These are the financial engines of Japan Post and were the units slated for privatization. Both subsidiaries have long received favorable government treatment, tilting the playing field against private banks and insurance firms, whether foreign or domestic. The government of Japan is in clear violation of its commitments under the World Trade Organization (WTO), and if the Upper House approves the legislation, Japan will reverse the efforts made by the United States and the European Union, as well as domestic private banks and insurance firms, to establish a level playing field. What's more, Japan risks having a formal WTO dispute brought against it.
Listen to related interview

On June 13, 2010, representatives from China and Taiwan held a third round of talks in Beijing on an Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA) that would liberalize important aspects of cross-Strait economic relations. It is clear from available details that ECFA will be an ambitious accord that fundamentally changes the game between Taiwan and China and hence affects the regional economy and even the transpacific tempo for the United States. Rosen and Wang's economic projections of the effects of a China-Taiwan ECFA point to significant benefits of cross-Strait economic reform, especially for Taiwan, which would increase its 2020 GDP by about 4.5 percent, or $21 billion, from the current trend line. The authors, however, also conclude that the regional economy around China and Taiwan is not standing still but is extraordinarily dynamic. Other agreements in the region will be negotiated (e.g., ASEAN+3), which will impose costs on Taiwan, if it does not do an ECFA, to the tune of almost -0.8 percent of GDP. So the net effect of ECFA for Taiwan would be some 5.3 percent improvement in GDP by 2020. For China, the net results of ECFA are positive, though far less so than for Taiwan in value terms and of course as a share of GDP.
For the United States, the authors project a very modest positive result from ECFA (though statistically marginal) but a more negative impact as the scenarios incorporating further Asian integration (ASEAN + 3) unfold. If the US objective is to maximize Taiwan's economic prospects and hence its freedom of independent action, then ECFA is highly desirable, and Taiwan's involvement in further Asian deepening is to be supported. However, US economic interests per se erode as Asia draws tighter together without US inclusion. That is an econometric reality. More significant still is the geoeconomic, qualitative implication of even long-standing nemeses China and Taiwan drawing together in a free trade pact while the United States watches, unable to ratify already negotiated Asian trade agreements like the US-Korea free trade agreement. While modest in global economic effects, the geoeconomic implications of a China-Taiwan economic pact are significant enough to demand strategic attention from the United States and underscore the importance of securing US economic engagement of the first order in Asia.

This policy brief updates Cline and Williamson's estimates of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs) to May 2010 using the data to March contained in the April issue of the International Monetary Fund's World Economic Outlook. The IMF's data are updated to May by subsequent exchange rate changes and Cline's estimates of the impact of exchange rate changes on trade flows. In addition, the assumptions about current account targets have been somewhat modified from previous years: All countries are now assumed to aim to keep current account balances within 3 percent of equilibrium, whereas formerly some countries with large net foreign assets to GDP ratios (NFA/GDP) were allowed larger targeted imbalances. The fundamental question explored is what pattern of exchange rates is consistent with satisfactory medium-term evolution of the world economy, interpreted as achieving those objectives while maintaining internal balance in each country.
The big disequilibrium in the pattern of exchange rates remains the undervaluation of the renminbi and the overvaluation of the dollar. The size of this disequilibrium is, however, less than previously estimated (now 15 percent on an effective basis and 24 percent bilaterally with respect to the dollar), due to the decline in the IMF's estimate of China's prospective current account surplus. The recent depreciation of the euro, while increasing the size of Euroland's prospective surplus, does not threaten to lead to an internationally unacceptable imbalance (i.e., greater than 3 percent of GDP) and therefore does not create a case for international action to reverse the rise. The yen is no longer found to be overvalued on an effective basis, although if China revalued that would create a case for a stronger yen/dollar rate. Several of the other East Asian currencies would also need to appreciate bilaterally to avoid effective undervaluation. Of the 28 other economies covered, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, and Taiwan are judged to need an effective appreciation and Australia, Brazil, New Zealand, South Africa, and Turkey to need an effective depreciation.

The current European economic crisis is principally fiscal in nature. During the weekend of May 8-9, 2010, European leaders crafted a very important and constructive political "grand bargain" between EU member states and the European Central Bank (ECB) with far reaching, positive implications for the credibility of the European Union's fiscal policy framework and the long-term sustainability of European government finances. There is no chance that the eurozone will break up as a result of the current economic crisis and in the long term from the effects of the grand bargain. Leaving the euro will come at catastrophic cost to any nation that tries to do so out of economic weakness. If Greece is ultimately forced to default on its debts, it is certain the Greek government would want to do it within the eurozone. As such, a Greek default poses no risk to the composition of the eurozone, which considering that a German departure is equally unlikely is a secure monetary union.
Kirkegaard suggests a set of required next steps for Europe: (1) European governments must immediately begin to address the lingering uncertainties surrounding the capital adequacy of the eurozone banking system; (2) it is crucial that eurozone governments, particularly among the Southern members, deliver expeditiously on the austerity and not least structural reform commitments recently made; and (3) the eurozone should consider introducing a potential "carrot" for members that successfully manage to put their government finances on a sustainable path. This carrot could come in the form of a future common "Maastricht bond," similar to the often suggested "eurobond," but open only to eurozone member s that actually adhere to the Maastricht Treaty debt stock criteria of a maximum level of government debt of 60 percent over an entire business cycle. A successfully launched pan-European Maastricht bond, backed by the credibility of years of painfully endured austerity measures across a sufficient number of participating member states, could achieve a scale and market depth not far off today's US treasury market. A Maastricht bond could consequently pose the first serious threat to an increasingly fragile US treasury market as the "global safe haven" asset.

The US House of Representatives has just passed the American Jobs and Closing Tax Loopholes Act. The tax provisions of this bill will hurt American workers, reduce American exports, and make American companies less competitive in the international marketplace. Since the US Senate has already passed companion legislation, these ill-considered bills could soon be reconciled in conference and become the law of the land. If so, American firms and workers will pay a substantial price.
The tax measures would cost $14 billion over 10 years for the foreign operations of US-based multinational corporations (MNCs), say Hufbauer and Moran. They illustrate an unfortunate direction of US tax policy under the Obama administration and its congressional allies: the eagerness to tax the foreign income of US-based MNCs as if they competed only with firms that are subject to US tax rules. MNCs based in Europe, China, India, or Brazil pay far less than the US tax rate when they compete head-to-head with US firms in world markets. Studies show that plants of US multinationals are the most productive in the United States, most technology-intensive, and pay the highest wages. If US tax policy is changed so as to hinder outward investment by US MNCs, the result will be fewer US exports, and fewer exports will spell fewer US jobs.
The best bottom line for American workers-and the American economy as a whole-is to make the United States a more favorable location for American multinationals to do business. Instead of raising taxes on the foreign income of US-based MNCs, Congress should be lowering the US corporate rate to 20 percent. Other countries understand the competitive realities well enough, but Congress seems determined to turn the United States into a loser.

On May 12, 2010, Senators John Kerry (D-MA) and Joseph Lieberman (I-CT) released details of their proposed American Power Act, a comprehensive energy and climate change bill developed over the preceding nine months by the two senators, chairmen of the Senate Foreign Relations and Homeland Security Committees respectively, along with Senator Lindsey Graham (R-SC).1 With US unemployment just below 10 percent and the sunken Deepwater Horizon drilling rig's ruptured well pouring thousands of barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico each day, the senators promised that if passed the bill will: (1) reduce US oil consumption and dependence on oil imports; (2) cut US carbon pollution 17 percent below 2005 levels by 2020 and over 80 percent by 2050; and (3) create jobs and restore US global economic leadership. In this policy brief the authors evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed American Power Act in achieving those goals.

G-20 summit planners seem to be giving trade issues short shrift on the already full agenda for their two scheduled meetings in 2010. Such complacency is unwarranted, argues Jeffrey J. Schott, given ongoing protectionist pressures fed by near double digit unemployment rates in the United States and Europe and the continuing impasse in the Doha Round negotiations. Instead, he recommends three concrete actions that G-20 leaders should take to demonstrate their commitment to deterring protectionism and advancing multilateral trade liberalization: "topping up" Doha offers, especially on services; expanding existing offers to provide duty-free/quota-free access for the poorest countries; and extending the G-20 trade standstill commitment by declaring a temporary moratorium on climate change related border measures.

President Barack Obama declared in his State of the Union address-echoing the rhetoric during his days as presidential candidate-that "it is time to finally slash the tax breaks for companies that ship our jobs overseas, and give those tax breaks to companies that create jobs right here in the United States of America." Do US multinationals deserve tax punishment because they "ship jobs overseas"? Hufbauer and Moran cite studies that compare US firms engaged in outward investment with similar firms that stay at home. They conclude that outward bound firms consistently export more from the United States than the home firms. If US tax policy were changed so as to hinder outward investment by US firms, evidence indicates US export performance would be weaker, not stronger. These tax changes would not lead to more investment at home either. The best bottom line for American workers-and the American economy as a whole-is to keep the United States a favorable location for American multinationals to do business. The plants of US multinationals are the most productive in the United States, most technology-intensive, and pay the highest wages.
In contrast to most countries that maintain simple territorial tax systems, either de jure or de facto, the United States subjects its multinationals to worldwide taxation. The United States should align its taxation of multinationals to the territorial norms of foreign competitors-from France and Germany to Brazil, India, and China. It should adopt its own version of territorial taxation and allow US-based multinationals to repatriate dividends from their foreign subsidiaries at a flat rate of 5 percent, with no foreign tax credit. This was successfully tried for 2005 in the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (the AJCA). The result was a gush of repatriated income, around $300 billion, and revenue that the US Treasury would never have seen. In 2010, the Congress should lay aside the administration's proposals for punishing US multinationals with higher taxes and instead make the AJCA tax of 5 percent on repatriated dividends a permanent part of the tax code.

The severe economic damage done by the global crisis of 2007-09 has reenergized calls to protect domestic products and producers in the United States. One example is a proposal to discriminate against foreign-owned insurance companies, using the tax code. The Neal bill (HR 3424), named after Congressman Richard Neal (D-MA), proposes to tax foreign-owned insurance companies doing business in the United States more heavily than US-owned insurance companies doing exactly the same business in the United States. If this bill or something like it is enacted, cautions Hufbauer, European countries are almost certain to bring a case against the United States in the World Trade Organization (WTO) and seek redress under US income tax treaties. Some European countries might consider tit-for-tat retaliatory legislation that would hurt US-owned insurance companies. While legal and retaliatory battles are waged, some foreign-owned insurance companies might reconsider their presence in the US insurance market-a role that has greatly benefited the US households and firms that suffered catastrophic losses in the wake of 9/11 and Hurricane Katrina. Equally important, it is a bad idea to deny US nonfinancial companies the benefit of competition between US-owned and foreign-owned firms in an industry that collects hundreds of billions of dollars of premiums annually. Tax abuse in the insurance market, if it exists, can be addressed without discriminating against foreign-owned companies.

New estimates by Arvind Subramanian for the undervaluation of the Chinese currency based on the purchasing power parity (PPP) approach find that the renminbi is undervalued by approximately 30 percent rather than the 12 percent widely reported. Subramanian applies new insights about the way PPP data are compiled, uses new data that have become available, and corrects existing estimates for the biases in the data in order to attain a more accurate estimation of China's currency undervaluation.
Corrective action must be taken not primarily to help China but to prevent its currency undervaluation from harming the rest of the world. The real victims of China's currency policies, argues Subramanian, are other emerging-market and developing countries because they compete more closely with China. It is crucial that the subject be broached delicately and with humility and that a multilateral approach be taken with China, most likely by going through the World Trade Organization.
China faces major challenges in sustaining its economic growth in a period of weak global recovery, particularly in Europe. In 2009 China's net exports of goods and services dropped precipitously, resulting in a substantial drag on economic growth. To overcome this drag China launched a massive stimulus program, financed largely with bank credit. While it is now widely understood that China was the first globally significant economy to begin to recover from the crisis, critics nonetheless increasingly charge that the stimulus program has substantial flaws and that China's early economic recovery cannot be sustained. One prominent critic has gone so far as to suggest that the stimulus has created a debt-fueled bubble that will collapse, causing China's growth to plunge to only 2 percent.
Nicholas Lardy suggests these criticisms are exaggerated. Contrary to repeated criticisms, this stimulus had a substantial consumption component and focused on investment in infrastructure rather than expanding capacity in traditional industries such as steel. But the stimulus did come at a cost insofar as it led to a substantial increase in the borrowing of local investment companies, which local governments will have to ultimately repay, but the infrastructure provided through these companies likely will contribute to China's sustained economic growth and thus to increasing government tax revenues as well.
The authorities recognize flooding the economy with more credit is not the way forward and that they will have to take strong additional policy initiatives to sustain economic growth. These include raising the prices of inputs such as water, electricity, and other resource products as well as introducing realistic environmental taxes and fees. These reforms, as well as a more flexible exchange rate, would reduce the distortions that for much of the past decade have favored industrial growth and exports over services and consumption and would contribute to sustaining China's impressive long-term economic growth.

The creation of a substitution account might be costly to the United States, but the cost could be greatly reduced by adopting a cost-sharing regime or assessing an annual fee on depositors. The United States also must consider the effect of reserve currency diversification by central banks that now hold larger dollar reserves than they need to cope with balance-of-payment problems. Large-scale diversification could cause extremely disorderly depreciation of the dollar. To avoid this, Kenen recommends revisiting the potential costs and benefits of a substitution account lodged in the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which could act as a barrier against further development of a multi-currency reserve system.

Policymakers and the public had high expectations for the UN climate change summit in Copenhagen last December. Since the international community embarked on a new round of negotiations in Bali in 2007, elections in the United States, Australia, and Japan raised developed countries' climate change ambitions and a number of emerging economies-including China, India, and Brazil-announced their first ever nationwide climate change targets. Yet while political will to tackle climate change appeared to be building, international climate change negotiations were failing to deliver. The UN process launched in Bali struggled for two years to reach agreement on even the most basic issues between the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). These two trends collided in Copenhagen, when ministers and heads of state arrived to find a negotiation process in disarray and no consensus text on the table. An eleventh-hour diplomatic flurry by leaders of a diverse and representative set of countries produced a political accord addressing the core issues of the negotiations. While attracting broad support among the 192 Parties to the UNFCCC, the accord did not receive unanimous approval. Instead, the UN "took note" of the agreement.
This policy brief assesses the two-week conference, evaluates the Copenhagen Accord that resulted, and discusses key issues the international community will face moving forward. Author Trevor Houser argues that despite the chaos in Copenhagen, the accord is a significant step in addressing global climate change. The chaos in Copenhagen presents the international community with a unique opportunity to go back to first principles and craft a more suitable and sustainable long-term approach to this challenge. Houser calls for combining the UN process aimed at producing a legally binding agreement with a small-group process that would start work immediately on a politically binding basis-an approach that would prevent near-term substantive action from being held hostage to disagreements over legal form while demonstrating that meaningful international cooperation is possible and thus building support for a future treaty.

Despite high drama, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) conference in Copenhagen ended as a flop. During chaotic negotiations and fundamental disagreements surrounding the formation of a post-Kyoto deal, five heads of state got together on the last day of negotiations in an attempt to salvage the conference with a document that would later be called the Copenhagen Accord. The United States, Brazil, South Africa, India, and China led a group of 20 supporting countries to craft the Copenhagen Accord, which was criticized because it was crafted behind closed doors and it did not commit major emitting countries to much in terms of emission reductions, finance, or technology transfer. The members of the UNFCCC agreed to "take note of" the Accord: Some leaders characterized this as a meaningful first step toward a future climate treaty, but many observers characterized the Accord as a failure because it is nonbinding and vague.
The meeting in Copenhagen made it clear that nothing will be accomplished in a system that requires consensus among 192 member nations. Some have stated that future climate cooperation should be driven by coalitions that are best suited to the task, such as a narrower group like the G-20. This approach would work best, according to Hufbauer and Kim, if several points are addressed: (1) financial responsibility to developing countries must be divided among the developed members; (2) there must be a commitment to provide public funds if private funds are not forthcoming; (3) a template of conditionality for developing countries must exist; and (4) emission control targets must be frequently reviewed in light of the 2 degrees Celsius cap.

The global financial crisis presents an opportunity-for the first time in many years-for wholesale reform of the international financial and monetary system. The root causes of the crisis, says Goldstein, can be found in both the financial and monetary spheres and so reforms must be prescribed for both. On the financial side, he emphasizes two problems: pricking asset price bubbles before they get too large and confronting "too big to fail" financial institutions. On the monetary side, he concentrates on what can be done to induce large, surplus economies to abandon now-and avoid in the future-beggar-thy-neighbor exchange rate policies.
Central banks and regulatory authorities need to try much harder to identify bubbles before they get too large and consider a better bubble-busting tool kit, which would include some combination of instruments such as regulatory capital and regulatory liquidity requirements, margin requirements, loan-to-value ratios on residential and commercial mortgages, and lending standards. To confront "too-big-to fail," if higher capital requirements for larger financial institutions are not enough, Goldstein prescribes taking together four policy measures: requiring all systemically important institutions to have wind-down plans that would prevent unacceptable spillovers; ensuring that special resolution authority exists for all systemically important financial institutions; designing resolution authority in a way that supports market discipline; and imposing explicit size limits on systemically important financial institutions relative to GDP.
Goldstein then draws attention to China's highly significant case of beggar-thy-neighbor exchange rate policy and the International Monetary Fund's abysmal surveillance of the problem. He recommends that the Fund become far tougher on errant countries than it is now. The Fund's engagement with members who have emerging exchange rate problems should be made less subject to politicization and long delays. There needs to be a workable framework for the Fund's exchange rate surveillance that is capable of sending the message that the Fund views the country's exchange rate policy not only as ill-advised but also as being inconsistent with the country's obligations as a member of the Fund and, hence, that the policy has to be changed. Finally, there needs to be a workable, graduated set of penalties for countries that refuse persistently to honor their international obligations on exchange rate policy.

In this update of estimates of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs) for 30 major economies, Cline and Williamson report on changes in disequilibria in exchange markets since March 2009, the date to which their earlier (June 2009) calculations referred. The overvaluation of the dollar has been sharply reduced from March to the end of 2009, from about 17 percent to about 6 percent. The remaining overvaluation of the dollar would be completely eliminated if the five East Asian economies with seriously undervalued exchange rates were to appreciate to FEER-consistent levels: China (which needs the most appreciation), Hong Kong, Malaysia, Taiwan, and Singapore.

 Listen to related interview

Cline and Williamson find that in the important case of the euro, whereas the currency was undervalued against the dollar by about 17 percent in March 2009, by end-December it had closed to about 7 percent below its FEER-consistent rate. Japan's bilateral undervaluation had also narrowed but only slightly. Several currencies have overshot from substantial undervaluation to overvaluation against the dollar, including those of Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Brazil, Indonesia, Hungary, and Poland. These economies typically have high interest rates, and their substantial currency overshooting reflects the shift in the international financial environment from acute panic and safe-haven influences in early 2009 to carry-trade dynamics by the end of the year in the face of zero US short-term interest rates. Two key trade partners for the United States, Canada and Mexico, have both swung from modest undervaluation against the dollar to somewhat greater overvaluation. The authors conclude with a reestimation of the FEER-consistent dollar rate for one important currency, the Korean won, and conclude that its FEER-consistent rate is now about 1,000 won to the dollar.

North Korea's confiscatory currency reform and the subsequent ban on the use of foreign currencies are economically misguided policies and will result in the reduction of North Korean residents' welfare. These developments come at an inopportune time with the country facing economic stagnation, spiraling prices, and a resurgence of food shortages. North Korea has made no attempt to veil its motivations: strengthening the socialist economy by directly attacking the market and the independence from state control that it represents. Stephan Haggard and Marcus Noland posit that these policies will require a ratcheting up of already high levels of repression, and as long as the state lacks the resources and capacity to provide goods to its citizens, the effort is unlikely to significantly contribute to the stated goal of rebuilding socialism or eradicating the market. The open questions are whether the policies will be reversed and whether they have sown such discontent as to threaten political stability. The survival instincts of North Korea's determined, resilient citizens may very well make the market a locus of precisely the political activity the regime seeks to thwart.

Governments and central banks around the world eased macroeconomic policies aggressively in response to the 2008 financial crisis, arguably forestalling a second Great Depression. More recently, however, policymakers have been talking about when to withdraw the stimulus. This focus on exit is misguided. Current forecasts show an extended period of economic stagnation in the developed world. We need additional stimulus now, argues Joseph Gagnon. In particular, central banks in the main developed economies should push long-term interest rates 75 basis points below the levels they would otherwise be by purchasing a combined $6 trillion in long-term public and private debt securities. Relative to current forecasts, this policy action is expected to boost GDP 3 percent or more over the next eight quarters and to reduce unemployment rates by between 1 and 3 percent. Without additional stimulus, unemployment rates are likely to remain above equilibrium levels for many years at great cost to the world economy in terms of lost income and personal hardship. Moreover, with inflation rates already below desired levels, excess unemployment threatens to cause a fall in prices that would further damp recovery and retard the necessary process of deleveraging. In light of high and rising levels of public debt, additional monetary stimulus is preferable to additional fiscal stimulus. Indeed, monetary stimulus reduces the ratio of public debt to GDP by reducing interest expenses, increasing GDP, expanding tax revenues, and enabling an earlier start to fiscal consolidation.

The global financial and economic crisis and prospects for large and sustained budget deficits in the United States have prompted countries with massive dollar holdings such as China to consider alternatives to the US dollar. These countries realize that they would suffer losses if inflation eroded the value of the dollar securities they own. Are there feasible alternatives to the US dollar as a widely used international currency? Richard Cooper looks at possible alternatives-major currencies in use, such as the euro, the yen, the pound, or even the Chinese renminbi, and a synthetic currency such as the special drawing rights of the International Monetary Fund-and concludes that no other currency seems likely to overtake the US dollar, and it is likely to remain the dominant international currency for a long time. He notes that international use of the euro will grow, perhaps even more rapidly than that of the dollar for some years, but because of limitations on issuers and financial markets, the euro is not likely to displace the dollar. In a growing world economy, there is room for both. A deliberate international decision to create an international currency could displace the dollar, but that task would be formidably difficult. The prospective gains from such a creation would have to be sufficiently great to make governments willing to overcome the practical difficulties and to adopt the complementary policies (mainly concerning exchange rates) necessary to give a new international currency a compelling advantage over present arrangements.

The special drawing rights (SDRs)-the International Monetary Fund's unit of account-could emerge as a rival to the US dollar as an international reserve currency. Williamson questions the assertion of Cato Institute's Swaminathan Aiyar that the SDR is not a currency and can never be one and the relevance of the fact that the IMF has no GDP and no taxing capacity and so lacks the fundamental requirements for creating a currency. It is true that only central banks accept SDRs in settlement of debts. But to the extent that they are so accepted, Williamson argues, they are money and could play a far more central role in the international monetary system than they have so far. Large SDR allocations could be a mechanism to ensure consistency in balance of payments objectives sought by countries around the world, one that ensures a much fairer distribution of gains from seigniorage-profit that accrues to whoever issues money. In the case of the SDRs, the IMF would be the issuer, and the seigniorage gains would be distributed in proportion to IMF quotas, which determine the proportion of allocations. For most countries, there is a clear advantage in boosting the role of the SDR and achieving a portion of the seigniorage gains. The interests of major reserve-currency countries, like the United States and potentially China, in displacing the dollar's reserve role can be disputed, but these countries too would benefit from an enhanced role of the SDR, depending on the evaluation of advantages and disadvantages.
As oil prices began to rise in 2009 from a low point of about $40 a barrel in January to around $70 a barrel in July, a question is whether the world is in for another oil price spike in the near term similar to that witnessed in early 2008. World oil prices skyrocketed from about $90 a barrel in January 2008 to cross the $140 a barrel mark in June, finally hitting a record high of $147 a barrel on July 11, 2008 before collapsing to less than $40 a barrel in December. Was the oil price increase of over 50 percent in the first six months of 2008 a bubble? If it was a bubble and oil prices overshot their long-term equilibrium level in the first half of 2008, did they undershoot when the bubble burst in the second half of the year?
Khan looks at a variety of indicators and explanations and concludes that speculation in the oil market created an oil price bubble in the first half of 2008. Absent speculative activities, the oil price would probably have been in the $80 to $90 a barrel range. What, then, does the 2008 phenomenon imply for the future? If, as Khan argues, speculation played a significant role in the 2008 bubble, then policies-such as those being considered by the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission-to limit aggregate futures positions will need to be implemented soon to prevent another bubble from emerging.
Another long-run danger for the world economy is that oil capacity expansion has slowed in 2009 but world oil demand is predicted to rise to 89 million barrels a day by 2014. If supply does not keep up and provide the additional barrels needed, a serious imbalance between future demand and supply in the world oil market would emerge. A major joint effort on the part of both producers and consumers to correct this potential imbalance, possibly along the lines recently proposed by UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown and French President Nicolas Sarkozy, involving both capacity expansion and conservation, will be needed over the next few years. Absent such an agreement, and if speculation is not controlled, oil prices could rise much higher than their long-term equilibrium level.

After years of inaction, the three partners in the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)-Canada, Mexico, and the United States-now recognize the imperative to start the long-term process of substantially reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The American Climate and Energy Security Act (ACESA) passed by the US House of Representatives in June 2009 cuts emissions, sets new standards for the use of renewable energy sources, and provides support to ease the transition to a low-carbon economy and to mitigate concerns about trade competitiveness of carbon-intensive industries and increased energy costs to consumers. The policy brief assesses the implications of the ACESA for North American trade and investment, particularly the free distribution of emissions permits, the allocation of revenues generated by the limited auctioning of emissions permits, the impact of renewable portfolio standards on US-Canada electricity trade, and the international offset provisions (that could be available to support Mexican policies seeking to cut GHG emissions in half by 2050).
In light of ACESA's trade implications, the authors offer a pragmatic NAFTA agenda for near-term action on climate change issues. First, the Commission for Environmental Cooperation should be used as a clearinghouse for climate change-related data. Second, Canada and the United States should standardize definitions of renewable energy and coordinate their policies. Third, NAFTA members should commit not to impose border measures to address competitiveness concerns arising from new climate change policies (i.e., a temporary "peace clause") until a framework for such measures is developed under the WTO. Fourth, NAFTA members should study options for coordinating or integrating the evolving carbon regimes in each country. Fifth, NAFTA partners should establish a "safe harbor" to shield climate change taxes and regulations from claims under the indirect takings provisions of NAFTA Chapter 11. Finally, capacity building in Mexico will be essential to North American coordination on climate change. The North American Development Bank should be used to provide finance and technical assistance for energy-saving and pollution control projects in Mexico in support of its ambitious climate change policies. North American cooperation could serve as a model for how developed and developing countries can mutually benefit from an international climate change agreement.

At the 2008 summit in Hokkaido, Japan, and again this summer in L'Aquila, Italy, G-8 leaders called for a 50 percent reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2050 in order to avert the most serious dangers from global climate change. Improving the energy efficiency of buildings is essential: The International Energy Agency (IEA) has estimated that meeting the G-8's emission-reductions goal will require reducing annual GHG emissions from the building sector by 8.2 billion tons by 2050 below business as usual. While previous studies have shown that the cost of emissions abatement in the buildings sector is cheaper than in many other sectors, few studies have attempted to model what policies will be required to reduce building-sector emissions in line with the IEA's calculations.
Trevor Houser, expanding on his earlier PIIE policy brief, uses the World Business Council for Sustainable Development's (WBCSD) model to study the economics of improving building-sector energy efficiency. Houser agrees with previous studies that the GHG abatement costs of improved building efficiency are cheaper than the abatement costs in other sectors (though more expensive than previous studies suggest), but he finds significant barriers to investments in energy efficiency. A carbon price alone-a key part of any successful climate policy-will not be enough to overcome these barriers, and complementary measures, such as improved financing approaches and enhanced standards and codes for building energy efficiency, will be needed to incentivize long-term building-sector investments and to meet the emission-reductions goals outlined by the IEA. Failure to enact such policies, and thus to take advantage of lower cost GHG abatement opportunities in the building sector, will force greater emission reductions in other sectors and will carry a much higher price tag.

The Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, which set out to achieve "free and open trade and investment in the region" and led highly significant liberalization initiatives in the 1990s, has been stagnating for the past decade. The main cause of APEC's marginalization was clearly the decision of key Asian countries to prioritize economic cooperation within East Asia itself rather than across the broader APEC construct: a focus on Pacific Asia rather than the Asia Pacific. Bergsten argues that for APEC to regain the dynamism and leadership position it enjoyed during its initial decade, it will have to reconcile the strong unresolved tensions between its original main purpose-to "avoid drawing a line down the middle of the Pacific"-and the Asia-centric cooperation priorities of most of its key members. The global environment in which APEC will be operating in the next 20 years is vastly different from that of the past two decades, with the G-20 replacing the G-7/8 as the chief steering committee for the world economy and the informal and de facto G-2 between China and the United States playing an increasingly central role.
These dramatic changes in the world economy and global governance patterns will influence the policy choices of countries in Asia but they do not alter the basic issue: Do the Asian members of APEC want a primarily Pacific Asia future or do they want an Asia Pacific dimension as well? Bergsten recommends that APEC renew aggressive leadership of the Asia Pacific. This option would reconcile the "Pacific Asia versus Asia Pacific" debate by embracing both as parallel initiatives. The United States would agree to support Asian regional integration as long as its components were compatible with the global rules, and the Asians would agree to simultaneously liberalize across the Pacific. The Obama administration is formulating a new trade policy for the United States and has already signaled a focus on Asia. The timing offers a golden opportunity for Pacific Asia to simultaneously achieve its regional objectives and solidify its relationship with the United States. APEC could thereby restore the dynamic leadership role of its initial decade and immeasurably strengthen both the region and the world economy as it addresses the likely global evolution of the next 20 years.

Periodic heightened political tensions between India and Pakistan have derailed attempts to improve economic ties and trade relations between the two countries. India-Pakistan trade is unnaturally small, currently about $2 billion per year. Pakistan accounts for less than 1 percent of India's trade, and India accounts for less than 5 percent of Pakistan's trade. Constraints include high tariff and nontarrif barriers, inadequate infrastructure, bureaucratic inertia, excessive red tape, and direct political opposition. Khan recommends that President Asif Ali Zardari and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, who had their first post-Mumbai attacks meeting on June 16, and are slated to meet again in Egypt in July, should pick up from where former President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Singh left off in their meeting in New Delhi in April 2005. The two governments could start with implementing short-term measures mainly to facilitate trade-such as easing restrictions on visas, opening additional border crossings and road routes, and increasing air links-many of which have already been agreed in principle at the April 2005 Musharraf-Singh meeting. The success of these "confidence building" short-term measures and the resulting growth in trade would encourage the creation of constituencies that would support more far-reaching liberalization of trade between the two countries. Over the medium to long term, Pakistan should grant most favored nation (MFN) status to India, which India already provides to Pakistan, and allow transit trade from India; India should significantly lower tariff rates for goods of particular interest to Pakistan (e.g., textiles) and remove nontariff barriers; and both countries should facilitate trade in energy, information technology, and services, remove obstacles to foreign direct investment flows, and harmonize customs procedures. Improving economic ties may help to resolve the larger political issues that have bedeviled India-Pakistan overall relations for over 60 years.

After decades of negligible outbound foreign direct investment (FDI), Chinese firms' outbound investment has reached significant levels in recent years, challenging international investment norms and affecting international relations. But China's outflows are poorly understood. Seen in context, China is a laggard in global investment, and the country faces numerous internal impediments to overcoming this disadvantaged position.
Daniel H. Rosen and Thilo Hanemann review the data behind China's growing outbound investment, consider the commercial and political forces driving this growth, and analyze both foreign and domestic obstacles for Chinese overseas investors. While extensive media coverage has provoked worries that Chinese firms are buying up the world, China remains a relatively minor global investor compared with OECD countries. China's net FDI position remains negative, with $5 of FDI assets under foreign ownership in China for every $1 of Chinese direct investment assets abroad. But China's efforts to rebalance its economic growth and make the shift toward higher value-added economic activity will increasingly force Chinese firms to invest abroad. Government policy has evolved in recent years to encourage and support China's firms to look abroad. Investment regimes in host countries are one obstacle to Chinese outbound FDI, but China's firms are even more impeded by home-made problems, including the parochial executive leadership and a dearth of key management skills needed to operate successfully overseas.
Rosen and Hanemann argue that the growing volume and changing nature of China's outbound investment have important implications for policymakers in host countries. Host country governments must clarify their policies and draw a clearer line between legitimate national security reviews and protectionist economic competitiveness impulses disguised as security concerns. The lack of data transparency contributes to the poor understanding of China's outbound investment, and these inadequacies must be corrected if China and investment incumbents are to work together optimally. In addition, given its disadvantaged FDI starting position China should be expected to pull considerable weight to preserve and promote an open international investment environment, including by maintaining openness at home. If China converges upward to OECD outbound investment levels rather than incumbent leaders trimming down to historic Chinese levels due to protectionism, then future flows coming from China can contribute positively to a range of international issues, from financial crisis recovery to mitigating climate change.

The European Union's aggressive response to the global financial crisis has prevented financial meltdown, but the continent's banking industry remains very fragile. Experts estimate coming losses in excess of $500 billion, with very little written down so far. These losses plus the problems in Eastern Europe portend widespread cross-border bank insolvencies. Traditional banking (in corporate finance and household savings) remains predominant in the European economies, so healing the banking system is crucial for sustained recovery in Europe. Lingering banking fragility would result in constant disruption or misallocation of bank credit and hinder returns to savers, thus depressing investment and consumption. Ongoing fragility will also harm European trend productivity growth by skipping some investment and R&D cycles, misallocating capital to lower-return projects, and wasting human capital by consigning some workers to long-term unemployment.
It will take time and political will to create an EU banking supervisory architecture, but Europe cannot afford to wait. Posen and Véron recommend that Europe engage in system-wide "triage" of major banks on the continent by capital position, leading to public restructuring of the weakest ones. They propose that relevant countries jointly create a temporary supranational agency or Treuhand to implement the triage process, catalyze recapitalizations, and manage any distressed assets that would fall into public ownership. Such a trustee would avoid both harmful races to the bottom within Europe by national supervisors and fiscal transfers between European states for bailouts.

The US Congress is now considering legislation to approve President Obama's pledge, made at the G-20 London summit in April, to increase the US commitment to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). This pledge is part of a collective effort by the G-20 leaders to triple the resources available to the IMF so that it can better respond to the ongoing global economic crisis. To this end, President Obama has submitted a four-part package to Congress for approval. The package would increase the US quota contribution to the IMF by about $8 billion, raise an emergency line of credit for the Fund by nearly $100 billion, endorse the IMF's plan to endow an investment fund through sales of some of its gold reserves in order to provide for its operational expenses, and approve a special allocation of the IMF's synthetic reserve asset, Special Drawing Rights (SDRs).
C. Randall Henning analyzes the politics and policy merits of the IMF legislation before Congress through a discussion of the IMF's role in the international monetary system, its relationship to US interests, and the congressional record of past IMF legislation. He argues that the present financial troubles have only increased the need for strong US support of the Fund. The IMF reflects the economic policy interests of the United States more faithfully than perhaps any other international institution and congressional action should reflect this basic convergence of interest. Failure to support the IMF now would not only hamper global and US recovery from the current crisis, but it would also undermine US influence, both within the IMF and in international relations generally.

Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), the reserve asset issued by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), have lately reappeared in the news. The G-20 leaders, at their recent meeting in London, endorsed a proposal to issue $250 billion in SDRs to counteract the financial crisis, while the governor of the People's Bank of China has called for SDRs to gradually replace the dollar at the center of the international monetary system, a plan that would be facilitated by allowing countries to convert their dollar reserve holdings into SDRs.
John Williamson reviews the history of the IMF's SDRs and provides an overview of these and other proposals that would increase this synthetic currency's role in the international monetary system. The SDR was originally created to resolve a recognized flaw in the structure of the postwar Bretton Woods monetary system, but the eventual breakdown of Bretton Woods and the subsequent evolution of the current dollar-centered system have relegated the SDR mostly to the minor role of serving as a unit of account for the IMF's transactions. Recent proposals would return the SDR to greater prominence and could help to create a financial system that is free from the imbalances that have plagued the world of late.

Cline and Williamson update their estimates of fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs) for leading advanced and emerging-market economies. This policy brief is a sequel to Policy Brief 08-7, published last July, and is based on the latest developments in the world economy. The authors, refining their methodology from last year, estimate a set of current account targets for 34 countries. On the basis of these estimates, they calculate the bilateral exchange rates against the dollar needed to meet these targets, using Cline's symmetric matrix inversion method (SMIM) first presented in Working Paper 08-6.
The authors find significant changes in calculated FEERs from their estimates last year. These changes are due in part to the world financial crisis, which created a significant safe-haven effect for the dollar and led to sharp declines in oil prices. As a result of these developments, the dollar has returned to significant overvaluation of about 17 percent: Every currency examined needs to appreciate against the dollar. While some imbalances with Europe have reemerged since last year, the major imbalance remains vis-à-vis certain Asian currencies, particularly the Chinese renminbi, which needs to rise by about 20 percent on a trade-weighted average basis and by about 40 percent against the dollar. Finally, the authors compare their 2009 FEERs estimates with their estimates from last year in order to assess the accuracy and validity of FEERs estimation.
In April 2009, the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York allowed a lawsuit to proceed against US companies that had done business with apartheid South Africa for abetting human-rights violations. In a previous ruling, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals held that firms could be found liable under the Alien Tort Statue (ATS) of 1789 if they were aware that their business activities may have substantially assisted the government's abusive practices, even if the firms did not intend to facilitate this abuse. The ATS allows alien plaintiffs to bring lawsuits against individuals or companies that are subject to US jurisdiction for violations of "the law of nations" or US treaties. While treaties constitute a defined body of law, the law of nations does not, and plaintiffs and human-rights groups in recent years have sought to elastically expand the definition of "the law of nations" from its meaning when the statue was enacted to include a broader range of abuses. In 2004, the US Supreme Court adopted a relatively restricted interpretation of the law of nations, but it failed to enunciate clear guidelines for lower courts on what constitutes an actionable violation under the ATS. Thus US and foreign firms remain at risk for ATS suits, such as the current apartheid suit. Gary Clyde Hufbauer briefly surveys the history of the Alien Tort Statute and considers the potential consequences of extensive ATS litigation. He finds that US and foreign firms that do business with countries accounting for half the world's economy, including China, India, Russia, and Brazil, are at risk under the ATS. Widespread litigation has the potential to disrupt tens of thousands of US jobs related to exports and foreign direct investment. Further, ATS litigation would interfere with US foreign policy and harm relations with foreign states. Hufbauer finds little reason to believe that ATS suits will result in serious improvement in human-rights conditions abroad. In order to avert a wave of ATS litigation, he recommends that multinational corporations devise a code of conduct to protect themselves from ATS suits. Finally, he urges Congress to enumerate violations of the law of nations that create causes of action under the ATS, thus clarifying the law, and to confer exclusive jurisdiction for ATS suits on the DC District Court and the US Federal Circuit, enabling clear and consistent policy in this sensitive area. 

At the 2008 summit in Hokkaido, Japan, G-8 leaders called for a 50 percent reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2050 in order to avert the most serious dangers from climate change. An essential component of meeting this goal will be improving the energy efficiency of buildings, which has been heralded by some studies as the most cost-effective way of reducing GHG emissions. Until now, however, few studies have attempted to assess the cost of completely overhauling the building sector in order to meet this emission-reduction goal.
Using a newly developed model from the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD), Trevor Houser studies the economics of improving building-sector energy efficiency. While improving the energy efficiency of the building sector would be more expensive than some studies have suggested, Houser finds that the GHG abatement costs of improved building efficiency are cheaper than the abatement costs in other sectors. However, significant barriers to investments in energy efficiency will make it difficult to take advantage of these lower abatement costs, even if a relatively high price for carbon is established. New financing approaches, improved building standards, government investment, and enhanced awareness of the energy cost savings from increased efficiency are all needed to reduce emissions from the building sector and thus to assist in meeting the 50 percent reduction target.
At the 2008 summit in Hokkaido, Japan, G-8 leaders called for a 50 percent reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2050 in order to avert the most serious dangers from climate change. An essential component of meeting this goal will be improving the energy efficiency of buildings, which has been heralded by some studies as the most cost-effective way of reducing GHG emissions. Until now, however, few studies have attempted to assess the cost of completely overhauling the building sector in order to meet this emission-reduction goal.
Using a newly developed model from the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD), Trevor Houser studies the economics of improving building-sector energy efficiency. While improving the energy efficiency of the building sector would be more expensive than some studies have suggested, Houser finds that the GHG abatement costs of improved building efficiency are cheaper than the abatement costs in other sectors. However, significant barriers to investments in energy efficiency will make it difficult to take advantage of these lower abatement costs, even if a relatively high price for carbon is established. New financing approaches, improved building standards, government investment, and enhanced awareness of the energy cost savings from increased efficiency are all needed to reduce emissions from the building sector and thus to assist in meeting the 50 percent reduction target.

President Barack Obama proposes to translate his rhetoric directed against "tax breaks to corporations that ship jobs overseas" into new tax measures that will penalize investment abroad by US-based multinational corporations (MNCs). Hufbauer and Kim believe that the United States should not try to constrain the overseas operations of these firms. Instead, the United States should reform its enormously complex tax system at home and create a business-friendly environment. Tax reform should be designed to boost both the domestic and international activities of US-based MNCs and bring more foreign investment to American shores. To that end, tax reform should target fundamental issues rather than populist sound bites.
The United States maintains a complicated tax system with multiple loopholes but accompanied by high statutory corporate rates, at about 39 percent (federal plus state). Team Obama should simplify the corporate tax regime and lower the federal marginal (i.e., statutory) tax rate to 25 percent or less. The United States should also adopt a territorial approach to the taxation of "active income" earned by foreign operations of US-based MNCs. In other words, the United States should end any US taxation of active income earned by subsidiaries operating abroad. Shifting from a worldwide tax system to a territorial system would ensure that the United States remains an attractive location for MNC headquarters-since the active business income of foreign subsidiaries would no longer be subjected to a residual US corporate tax. The authors also recommend ways to deal with abuse of transfer pricing, and they support another tax holiday, at a 5.25 percent repatriation rate, both to gain revenue and to make it easier for corporations to raise cash in the midst of the financial crisis.

The global financial crisis offers all world leaders an opportunity to think big and reach out to international cooperation. President Barack Obama should seize this opportunity to dramatically turn around US-Russia relations by establishing a positive interaction with President Dmitri Medvedev based on an early formulation of a Russia policy. Aslund and Kuchins recommend that integration, as opposed to isolation, is the best way to "manage Russia's rise." They identify six key areas of desired cooperation: Iran and missile defense, European and regional security including Afghanistan, arms control, commercial relations, energy policy, and democracy and human rights. The US approach to Russia should foster an environment of mutual trust in which Russians are likely to make choices that will both promote global security and enhance their own prosperity. A Russia with a mature market economy and robust democratic institutions will be the most constructive and effective partner for the United States.

Senior officials of East Asian governments and central banks will hold several meetings between February and May 2009 to consider, among other things, transforming the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI) from a network of bilateral swap arrangements into a collectively managed fund-which they refer to as "CMI multilateralisation." The region's disaffection from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), stemming from the 1997-98 financial crisis, sustains the attraction of such a fund among the ten members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations plus China, Japan, and South Korea (ASEAN+3). The present financial crisis presents a moment of truth for ASEAN+3: Are they serious about regional financial cooperation?
Creating a common regional fund would require addressing questions of obligations, contributions, and rights of members as well as the size, governance, and borrowing arrangements. ASEAN+3 officials appear to be converging on $120 billion as the size of the fund. But they have yet to decide on the specific contributions from each member and exactly how joint decisions will be made. The shares of China and Japan are particularly important, because they will determine the relative influence of the two countries.
Henning argues that CMI multilateralisation could contribute to the global financial architecture by supplementing the resources of the IMF and streamlining negotiations over financial rescues. ASEAN+3 should develop their own surveillance mechanism further with assistance of international financial institutions. Given the current weakness of regional surveillance, however, East Asian governments should continue to link their bilateral swaps and any common fund to the IMF. Henning urges the international community to establish guidelines for the respective roles of regional facilities, the IMF and other international financial institutions.

No industry save financial services has been harder hit by the current recession than the automobile industry. Employment in the US auto industry dropped 9 percent between 2007 and 2008, while auto sales fell 18 percent over the same period. The credit freeze has only added to the distress, since financing is required for most vehicle purchases. These have rippled throughout the economy, jeopardizing jobs at the automakers themselves and in numerous dependent firms, such as parts manufacturers. Similar downturns have hit automakers and their supporting industries around the globe.
In response to these troubles, the major US automakers-General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler-have appealed to the government for financial aid, and they are now seeking an additional $20 billion. A variety of measures to support the auto industry have been debated, including using funds from the Trouble Assets Relief Program to assist the financing arms of the automakers, tax credits for new vehicle purchases, and bailouts of auto-parts firms. Countries in North America, Europe, and Asia with large auto industries have considered similar proposals. Concerns have been raised regarding whether these plans violate World Trade Organization (WTO) rules and what effects they may have on world trade.
Claire Brunel and Gary Clyde Hufbauer consider auto-bailout proposals in the United States and abroad and examine whether these plans are WTO compliant. While a WTO case could be brought under the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, this is unlikely both because of the environmental requirements of the bailouts and because most countries that could potentially bring a case against the United States subsidize their own auto industries. Another possibility is that a US firm could bring a case against a foreign automaker under US countervailing duty laws. A successful case, however, is unlikely to lead to the elimination of the contested subsidy, but would instead establish a duty on exports from the country in question, further fragmenting world trade. This highlights the ultimate danger of auto bailouts and aid: The auto industry, much like shipbuilding and steel, may gradually leave the realm of WTO disciplines, with large-scale subsidies becoming the norm. If an important industry like autos can remove itself from WTO disciplines, a dangerous precedent would be set and the world trading system seriously weakened.

As the new Congress and President Obama take office, enacting a fiscal stimulus program is at the top of the legislative agenda. Because the size of this program may limit the scope for other legislative priorities and because US consumers' new-found propensity to save makes government spending a more attractive approach for economic recovery, policymakers are hoping to direct government spending in a way that not only generates short-term economic growth and employment but also addresses long-term policy goals. Energy security and greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) reductions are chief among these goals, and smart government investment in these areas can both create jobs today and lower the future cost of implementing long-term policies such as a cap-and-trade program or carbon tax.
Trevor Houser, Shashank Mohan, and Robert Heilmayr consider twelve proposed "green" stimulus programs and examine the economic, environmental, and energy-security costs and benefits of these proposals using the Energy Information Administration's National Energy Modeling System and the Bureau of Economic Analysis's RIMS II multipliers. These proposals fall into three basic categories: energy efficiency investments, such as programs to refit federal buildings and weatherize homes; power generation programs, including extension of the production tax credit for renewable energy and the installation of "smart" meters; and transportation proposals, such as hybrid tax credits, funding for battery research and development, and mass transit expansion. They find that their twelve programs create an average of 30,100 job-years per $1 billion in government spending, comparing favorably with an average of 7000 job-years for every $1 billion in temporary tax cuts or 25,200 job-years per $1 billion in traditional infrastructure investment. These proposals also have a favorable impact on US GHG emissions and reduce US imports of oil and natural gas, but these effects are not significant enough to replace long-term policies in these areas. Rather, these policies can lay the groundwork for long-term policy goals, reducing the cost of implementing such policies down the road while at the same time spurring employment and helping to reverse the continuing economic downturn.
As the new Congress and President Obama take office, enacting a fiscal stimulus program is at the top of the legislative agenda. Because the size of this program may limit the scope for other legislative priorities and because US consumers' new-found propensity to save makes government spending a more attractive approach for economic recovery, policymakers are hoping to direct government spending in a way that not only generates short-term economic growth and employment but also addresses long-term policy goals. Energy security and greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) reductions are chief among these goals, and smart government investment in these areas can both create jobs today and lower the future cost of implementing long-term policies such as a cap-and-trade program or carbon tax.
Trevor Houser, Shashank Mohan, and Robert Heilmayr consider twelve proposed "green" stimulus programs and examine the economic, environmental, and energy-security costs and benefits of these proposals using the Energy Information Administration's National Energy Modeling System and the Bureau of Economic Analysis's RIMS II multipliers. These proposals fall into three basic categories: energy efficiency investments, such as programs to refit federal buildings and weatherize homes; power generation programs, including extension of the production tax credit for renewable energy and the installation of "smart" meters; and transportation proposals, such as hybrid tax credits, funding for battery research and development, and mass transit expansion. They find that their twelve programs create an average of 30,100 job-years per $1 billion in government spending, comparing favorably with an average of 7000 job-years for every $1 billion in temporary tax cuts or 25,200 job-years per $1 billion in traditional infrastructure investment. These proposals also have a favorable impact on US GHG emissions and reduce US imports of oil and natural gas, but these effects are not significant enough to replace long-term policies in these areas. Rather, these policies can lay the groundwork for long-term policy goals, reducing the cost of implementing such policies down the road while at the same time spurring employment and helping to reverse the continuing economic downturn.

On January 28, 2009, the US House of Representatives passed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. Out of the bill's 700 text pages, a small half-page section attracted enormous media attention: the section requiring that all public projects funded by the stimulus plan must use only iron and steel produced in the United States. The US Senate draft includes a broad Buy American provision that goes further than the House bill, expanding the requirement to all manufacturing products.
Based on economic and legal analysis, the authors conclude that the Buy American provisions would violate US trade obligations and damage the United States' reputation, with very little impact on US jobs. They estimate that the additional US steel production fostered by the Buy American provisions will amount to around 0.5 million metric tons. This in turn translates into a gain in steel industry employment equal to roughly 1,000 jobs. The job impact is small because steel is very capital intensive. In the giant US economy, with a labor force of roughly 140 million people, 1,000 jobs more or less is a rounding error. On balance the Buy American provisions could well cost jobs if other countries emulate US policies or retaliate against them. Most importantly, the Buy American provisions contradict the G-20 commitment not to implement new protectionist measures—a commitment that was designed to forestall a rush of "beggar-thy-neighbor" policies.
What should be done? The best result would be to simply delete the Buy American provision in the House-Senate conference. Next best would be to keep the House version, applying the Buy American restriction only to iron and steel, but stating explicitly—in either the statutory text or in the legislative history—that the public interest waiver is intended to be used to avoid violations of US trade obligations. The third option is a presidential statement—preferably before legislation is finalized—that the United States will respect its international obligations when it applies the Buy American provisions.

Conventional wisdom holds that the United States is a country of low taxes and small government, while the European countries have much larger governments with a higher tax burden. Fully measuring the role of government in a society, however, requires more than a comparison of tax burdens or the gross size of government spending in GDP terms. A proper accounting of the total share of national economic output allocated to governmental tasks and social expenditures in the United States and Europe calls this supposed transatlantic difference into question.
European countries do have a much higher tax burden than the United States. However, healthcare and educational services, including tertiary education, are overwhelmingly provided by the government in Europe, while in the United States these services are much more often provided through the private sector. When private-sector spending on education and healthcare are combined with total government spending, the share of GDP allocated to these typically governmental functions in the United States is nearly identical to that in most European countries. Likewise, European countries have much higher levels of public social expenditures than the United States, but when the tax treatment of social benefits and tax breaks targeted to social purposes are considered, total public and private-sector social expenditures in the United States and Europe are quite similar. Thus there is very little difference between the United States and Europe in the share of resources allocated to governmental tasks and social expenditures, with the exception of much higher US private-sector healthcare expenditures. There is, however, little empirical evidence that higher private-sector US healthcare spending produces noticably better healthcare outcomes.
Equal existing total levels of expenditures suggests that reform of US social and economic institutions does not require greater total resources, but instead an adjustment of how and to what purposes these resources are allocated. The more extensive provision of frequently tax-benefitted governmental and social services indirectly through the private sector in the United States further shields recipient groups from the public scrutiny usually given to direct government transfers. Similarly, tax-benefitted indirect services provision may explain why Americans are more hostile to higher taxes than Europeans, who generally receive these services as a direct quid pro quo from their governments and are thus likely more disposed to paying taxes.

The Chinese banking system has improved significantly over the past decade, but in one critical respect, it appears to have regressed. The People's Bank of China controls interest rates in a way that has led to significant financial repression-low and now negative real return on deposits-as inflation has risen in recent years. This distorted interest rate structure is a significant obstacle to further reform of the financial system and to sustaining China's rapid economic growth. Financial repression costs Chinese households about 255 billion renminbi (US$36 billion), 4.1 percent of China's GDP, and a fifth of it goes to corporations, one-quarter to banks, and the government assumes the rest.
Financial repression reduces the cost to the government of sterilized intervention to sustain China's undervalued exchange rate relative to the cost it would face if interest rates were liberalized. But the financial repression that facilitates an undervalued exchange rate imposes substantial, if partially hidden, costs on China's economy. It has led to lending rates that are far too low, resulting in excess demand for bank loans and increased use of quantitative targets to control credit growth. These have led to a less efficient allocation of capital through the banking system and to a huge underground financial market.
Financial repression is also contrary to the government's long-term goal of developing a commercial banking system. It has also depressed the growth of household income, undermining the government's goal of transitioning to a growth path that relies less on investment and net exports and more on domestic consumption. Finally, financial repression seriously hinders the development of a fully and efficiently functioning capital market.
Cline and Williamson present estimates of the fundamental equilibrium exchange rates (FEERs) of leading advanced and emerging-market economies: The US dollar remains significantly overvalued against a number of Asian currencies, most prominently the Chinese renminbi and, to a lesser extent, the Japanese yen. The euro and the pound are overvalued on a multilateral basis but have not overshot greatly against the dollar; the depreciation in their multilateral exchange rates should come largely from the appreciations of a number of Asian currencies if it is to contribute positively to the adjustment process. The Asian currencies that should appreciate most are the Singapore dollar, the Chinese renminbi, the Malaysian ringgit, the New Taiwan dollar, and the Japanese yen.
The authors estimate the misalignment of currencies in 30 economies and find the set of exchange rates against the dollar needed to correct all these misalignments simultaneously. The estimates of misalignments are based on a set of current account targets that do not in general exceed 3 percent of GDP, whether deficits or surpluses. Adjustments needed to reach these targets are translated into needed exchange rate realignments using Cline's symmetric matrix inversion method (SMIM) model. This model is explained in detail in Working Paper 08-6 by Cline.
See also the update to this policy brief, 2009 Estimates of Fundamental Equilibrium Exchange Rates.

North Korea is on the brink of famine. The aggregate food picture appears worse than at any time since the famine of the 1990s. The margin of error between required grain and available supply is now less than 100,000 metric tons. Local food prices are skyrocketing faster than world prices. The regime has soured its aid relationships with key donors, and its control-oriented policy responses are exacerbating distress. Support for aid has been further eroded by evidence of diversion of food aid to the military and the market. Hunger-related deaths are nearly inevitable, and a dynamic is being put in place that will carry the crisis into 2009.
The long-run solution to North Korea's chronic food insecurity problems is a revitalization of industry, which would allow North Korea to export industrial products, earn foreign exchange, and import bulk grains on a commercially sustainable basis. In the short run, North Korea should openly acknowledge the growing crisis and conclude negotiations with the World Food Program and other donors so that assistance can begin to flow. The United States can provide aid in ways that maximize its humanitarian impact while limiting the degree to which aid simply serves to bolster the regime. It should also exercise quiet leadership with respect to North Korean refugees.

The decision by the House of Representatives on April 10 to change the rules for Congressional action on trade agreements drives a gaping hole in US trade policy and poses the gravest threat to the global trading system in decades. By rejecting long-settled procedures that prevented Congressional sidetracking of trade deals agreed by fully authorized Presidents, it instantaneously destroyed the credibility of the United States as a negotiating partner in the eyes of the rest of the world. Unless reversed soon, the House action will severely damage both the US economy and US foreign policy. It will particularly undermine the presumed goal of any new Administration in 2009 to restore our country's standing as a reliable partner in a cooperative multilateral world.
It would help if Congress and the present Administration could pick up the pieces and pass the Colombia agreement, and the pending South Korea and Panama agreements as well. But the fundamental problem of US international credibility on trade will remain until a foolproof Trade Promotion Authority, or some equivalent successor, is renewed and indeed ensconced permanently. This can only be done, probably by the next Administration, as part of a "grand bargain" that recognizes the costs of liberalization and thus includes a major expansion of governmental assistance to workers dislocated by trade and perhaps other sources of dynamic change in our economy. In the absence of such a renewed foundation for an open and active US trade policy, both our economy and our foreign policy will suffer severely.

Management of sovereign wealth funds (SWFs)-pools of government-owned or government-controlled financial assets-has become a major focus of national and international economic and financial policy. The principal reasons are their size, lack of transparency, potential to disrupt financial markets, and the risk that political objectives might influence investment decisions. Truman provides a blueprint for SWF best practices to make them more transparent, predictable, and accountable to their own citizens and governments, citizens and governments of host countries, and participants in financial markets.
The blueprint for SWF best practices is based on a scoreboard he has constructed for the current practices of 44 SWFs. The scoreboard contains 33 elements grouped in four categories: structure of the fund, governance, transparency and accountability, and behavior of the fund in managing its portfolio. The elements of the scoreboard can be incorporated into best practices without asking any fund to do something that at least one other fund does not already do. This blueprint meets the substantive principles that have been enunciated by G-7, US, and EU officials and provides a basis for evaluating the results of the International Monetary Fund-sponsored dialogue on SWF best practices.

The creation of an enduring multilateral security and peace mechanism for Northeast Asia and the furthering of regional economic cooperation have been identified as components of a final resolution of the North Korean nuclear controversy in the Six Party Talks among the United States, China, Japan, Russia, South Korea, and North Korea. Haggard and Noland argue that a central objective should be North Korea's integration into the world economy, encouraging its economic revival and the resolution of its chronic humanitarian problems, as well as embedding it in relations that could reduce the likelihood of future disruptive behavior. Reform and the international private sector's involvement in the country's economic renewal are key. Yet the North Korean tail should not wag the dog: To be fruitful and politically sustainable, the agenda must engage the interests of all six parties, not just those of North Korea. With progress stalled on more legalistic forms of regional integration, the authors suggest that the Economy and Energy Cooperation Working Group, created by the six parties in February 2007, could become the locus for wider economic cooperation and thus complement the security agenda for Northeast Asia.

More than 40 years ago, Congress established the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program to provide assistance to workers and firms adversely affected by import competition. The program provides extended income maintenance and training to workers and technical assistance to firms. TAA was expanded in the 1970s and cut back during the 1980s. Provisions included in the Trade Act of 2002 breathed new life into the program. Eligibility criteria were extended to include secondary workers and workers who lose their jobs due to offshore shifts in production. A health insurance tax credit and wage insurance were added to the package of assistance for workers. TAA for Farmers and Fishermen was also created. Congress is currently considering further changes to the program, including covering service workers and expanding the health insurance tax credit and wage insurance. Many believe that expanding TAA is critical to winning congressional support for further trade liberalization.

Commentators, including Princeton University's Alan Blinder, estimate 40 million jobs could be at risk of being offshored over the next 20 years and suggest American workers should specialize in services that can be delivered face-to-face. In contrast, Jensen and Kletzer expect the process of globalization in services will proceed much as it has in manufacturing: They estimate only 15-20 million jobs are at risk of being offshored to low-wage, labor-abundant countries; approximately 40 percent of these jobs will be in the manufacturing sector, long considered "at risk." They expect these losses to be offset by job gains in high-wage activities from services exporting. The United States will retain its comparative advantage in high-skill, high-wage production and increase these activities in tradable service industries as trade barriers diminish. While the loss of low-wage activities that are offshored and the gain from high-wage service exports will cause dislocation, the globalization of services production is likely to have productivity-enhancing effects similar to the impact of globalization in the manufacturing sector, offering significant potential to improve living standards in the United States and around the world. 

High oil prices are again transforming oil-exporting countries. With oil trading at $90 a barrel, government coffers in these countries are overflowing with the oil windfall, and stock markets there are booming. However, one feature of these oil exporters has not changed: their propensity to peg to the dollar.
Large oil-exporting economies that border the Persian Gulf peg to the dollar even more tightly than China does while some others peg to a basket of currencies of oil-importing countries-mainly the dollar and the euro. These economies are making a policy mistake. They would be better served by a currency regime that assures their currencies depreciate when the price of oil falls and appreciate when the price of oil rises. Those that lack the institutions to conduct an autonomous monetary policy should peg to a basket that includes the price of oil.
Exchange rate flexibility would reduce the need for domestic prices in the oil-exporting economies to rise and fall along with the price of oil, create additional room for monetary policy to reflect domestic conditions, and help oil-exporting economies manage the large swings in government revenue that accompany large swings in the oil price. The time has come to decouple the currencies of large oil-exporting economies from the dollar.

The Korea-United States Free Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA) opens up substantial new opportunities for bilateral trade and investment in goods and services and promotes important foreign policy interests of both countries. The FTA quickly removes most tariff barriers to auto trade and substantially reduces tax and regulatory burdens that impede sales of US cars in Korea; improves access to the Korean market for a wide range of US farm products; and opens up the Korean services market in key areas such as financial services, insurance, express delivery, and legal and accounting services. Nonetheless the ratification of the KORUS FTA has been controversial. In the United States attention has focused on both the auto sector, which accounts for almost one-quarter of bilateral trade and a large share of the US trade deficit with Korea, and Korean restrictions on US beef imports due to bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) concerns. Several automakers and auto unions have opposed the deal, and the Democratic leadership in the US House of Representatives has demanded that the auto provisions be recast. In the US Senate, the resolution of the beef problem-which is now being addressed by Korean regulators-is a prerequisite to passage of implementing legislation. No clear timetable exists for the congressional vote and action may be deferred until 2008. The Bush administration will have to respond constructively to Democratic concerns about the FTA before the deal can be ratified and should consider new federal programs to help promote the competitiveness of US automakers. Doing so should attract a substantial minority of Democrats in the House, along with the majority of Republicans, to support the FTA. The stakes-in terms of both US economic and security interests in East Asia-are too great, and the costs too high, to reject the pact or defer a decision.

Management of official holdings of foreign assets, in particular in sovereign wealth funds, has become a major focus of national and international economic and financial policy. The principal reasons are their size, lack of transparency, potential to disrupt financial markets, and the risk that political objectives might influence their management. Moreover, such large cross-border holdings in official hands are at sharp variance with today's market-based global economy and financial system. These investment activities of governments have become sufficiently significant that an internationally agreed standard should be established to guide these activities. The standard should apply to the gamut of international investments of governments, including traditional foreign exchange reserves, stabilization funds, nonrenewable resource funds, sovereign wealth funds, and government-owned or controlled entities such as pension funds. The standard should ensure that international investments of governments are based on clearly stated policy objectives and investment strategies. It should set out the role of the government and the managers of the investment mechanism/entity and ensure that the operations of the investment mechanisms are as transparent as possible. Depending on the type of mechanism, its size, and the scope of its activities, behavioral guidelines with respect to its management should be established. Such a standard would contribute not only to financial stability in the countries directly involved but also to international financial stability by increasing the transparency, accountability, and predictability of the operations of governments in managing their international investments and discharging their obligations to current and future generations.
The May 10, 2007, congressional-executive branch agreement, labeled "A New Trade Policy for America," establishes a bipartisan foundation of confidence and trust and provides new language for pending free trade agreements (FTAs). Most important is the accord on inclusion of core labor standards, a matter of sharp partisan division over the past decade. The new trade policy also includes a range of environmental provisions, a new balance between intellectual property rights and trading partners' health needs, provisions on post security and US investor rights, and a general "strategic worker assistance and training (SWAT) initiative." The agreement was reached after four months of negotiations between key House Democrats-with Representative Charles B. Rangel, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, in the lead-and US Trade Representative (USTR) Susan C. Schwab, with ranking Ways and Means Republican Jim McCrery engaged throughout. Rangel had decided early that bipartisan accord on trade was possible and staked his reputation on bringing it about, working carefully with colleagues of both parties, persisting when hopes receded. His wisdom in reaching out to McCrery was vindicated as the ranking Republican worked assiduously and effectively to find compromises on the toughest issues. USTR Schwab recognized early that trade policy needed a new bipartisan base and that Rangel offered the only realistic hope of achieving it. She showed flexibility in making necessary concessions early and persistence in concluding the agreement. The base in substantive understanding and trust that the accord builds will be helpful if and when Congress addresses broader issues like renewal of trade promotion authority (TPA), which is necessary for completion of the multilateral Doha Round. But TPA extension is unlikely to be enacted until there is sufficient progress in the Doha talks to make it worth the necessary investment of time and political capital by the administration, Congress, and private interests.Spanish language version 

The world economy faces a grave danger from the large imbalances in current account positions. Policymakers should not wait until financial markets force global adjustment. They should initiate a credible, comprehensive adjustment program to reduce the risks of a crisis, which could produce a world recession and disruptions to the global trading system. Participants in a February 2007 workshop, held in Washington and sponsored by Brussels-based Bruegel, Seoul-based Korea Institute for International Economic Policy, and Washington-based Peterson Institute for International Economics, outlined how an orderly reduction in global imbalances can be achieved. They presented estimates of the exchange rate implications of current account adjustment scenarios in which the US current account deficit narrowed to 3 percent of GDP in the medium term and the world growth rate was unchanged. Most of the adjustment would be borne by China, Japan, other Asian economies, a few high-surplus European economies not in the euro area, and the oil-exporting countries. The combined role of the smaller surplus economies in Asia and Europe (outside of the euro area) in the adjustment process will be more important than the role of either China or Japan. The adjustment would require a rebalancing of world demand with both higher saving in the United States and higher consumption in East Asia, as well as effective appreciations of the currencies of China, Japan, and other surplus countries in East Asia and Europe and bilateral appreciations against the dollar by other currencies. The problem is multilateral in nature and needs to be addressed in a multilateral context such as that potentially provided by the International Monetary Fund.
Workshop Papers

An essential pillar of a US strategy toward East Asian integration is acceptance of the legitimacy and desirability of that process. US acceptance of the economic integration of Europe is the model. Further, the United States-as well as Canada and Mexico-should seek to nest any new Pacific-Asia trade arrangements in a broader Asia-Pacific framework: Creation of a Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific (FTAAP) would embed Pacific Asia in the Asia Pacific. Another part of the US strategy should be to strengthen the substantive capabilities and political legitimacy of the global economic institutions, especially the World Trade Organization and the International Monetary Fund, to minimize the need for (and appeal of) new Asia-only regional compacts.

At their latest annual summit in Vietnam in November 2006, the leaders of the 21 members of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum agreed to "seriously consider" negotiating a Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific (FTAAP). The FTAAP initiative may well turn out to be the best, or perhaps only, way to catalyze a substantively successful Doha Round. If it cannot do that, an FTAAP can still offer a Plan B to restore the momentum of trade liberalization, prevent further proliferation of bilateral and subregional preferential trade arrangements, avoid renewed risk of "drawing a line down the middle of the Pacific," channel the US-China economic conflict into a more constructive, less confrontational context, and revitalize APEC itself. Perhaps most important, an FTAAP could maintain US engagement in Asian, and even global, trade relations by providing a basis for congressional extension of trade promotion authority in mid-2007 and a negotiating momentum that the next US president in early 2009 will feel compelled to maintain.

The current allocation of decision making in the International Monetary Fund (IMF), determined largely by the distribution of members' quotas, has failed to keep up with the changing world economy. The situation undermines the Fund's relevance and legitimacy in promoting global growth and economic and financial stability. A new simplified and transparent formula to guide the distribution of Fund quotas is key to IMF reform. The authors offer four recommendations to advance IMF quota reform: (1) The IMF executive board should complete its work on the new IMF quota formula by the 2007 annual meeting-rather than spring 2008-to ensure that the other necessary elements of a reform package can be completed by spring 2008 and ratified by the IMF governors at their annual meeting in fall 2008. (2) The new quota formula should follow the recommendations of the quota formula review group (QFRG), deleting an "openness" measure from the formula. The openness variable has no economic or financial justification, and the traditional measures are biased. (3) The traditional industrial countries should agree to a target of limiting their quota shares to 60 percent of their GDP shares to facilitate the further redistribution of quota shares toward the nonindustrial countries. (4) A reasonable benchmark would be an increase in the size of the Fund (total quotas) by at least 50 percent to implement the redistribution of quota and voting shares under the new quota formula.

The relentless increase in the US trade deficit since the early 1990s has raised concerns about America's ability to compete in international markets and given rise to calls for new ways to think about international competition and new ways of responding to US trade deficits. This policy brief challenges such views. It reports evidence that indeed it has become harder for the United States to sell its goods overseas over the past decade. However, the change has been modest and well within historical experience. The exchange rate of the dollar is the major factor leading to the trade deficit rather than any structural inability of US manufacturing or services to compete in the new global environment. Accordingly, we judge that there is no need for a new trade paradigm, and it would be a mistake to adopt protectionist trade policies. Two simultaneous adjustments are required to bring about a smaller trade deficit. First, spending must switch from foreign to US goods. In addition, since the United States must reduce its borrowing from abroad, spending must fall relative to income. This expenditure switching can be induced by a decline in the dollar. An increase in national saving, public and private, or alternatively and less desirably, a reduction in investment could both slow spending. Trade restrictions, on the other hand, are either ineffective, more costly, or both.

The traditional monetary arrangement, in which a country uses and manages a distinct money, has several strong advantages, but countries have increasingly been adopting other arrangements: currency unions, use of another country's currency, and currency boards. Countries entering into a monetary union agree to share monetary sovereignty. But abandonment of monetary sovereignty (full or near-dollarization) implies a permanent and irrevocable outsourcing of monetary policy. A currency board also implies outsourcing of monetary policy but without the presumption that it is permanent or irrevocable. When deciding whether to share (or abandon) monetary sovereignty, a country must ask whether the political symbolism of a common money, reduced transactions costs (and increased trade), and probably better monetary management outweigh the increased cost of having to adjust without the freedom to vary the exchange rate.

Reviving and completing the Doha Round will pose significant challenges for all the major trading nations. The United States has to make further cuts in farm support and open up trade in labor services, and the European Union has to do more on agricultural market access as well as industrial tariffs and services. Major developing countries need to make concrete offers to reduce protection for goods and services and to give poorer developing countries preferential market access. China needs to contribute more than any other developing country and perhaps as much as industrial countries on market access for manufactured goods. To complete the Doha Round, US officials need Congress to extend trade promotion authority (TPA), but it won't do so unless the Bush administration demonstrates progress in trade talks. TPA is dead unless the Doha Round and big bilateral trade talks promise to deliver a substantial package of reforms in agriculture, manufactures, and services that create trade and investment opportunities for US firms, workers, and farmers.

China's decision to transition away from growth driven by investment and a growing global trade surplus toward one more dependent on domestic consumption is laudable. But to date China's initiatives have been too modest to change its underlying growth dynamic. China's external surplus continues to balloon and, short of a US recession, seems likely to expand further in 2007. Household consumption as a share of GDP continued to decline in the first half of 2006. Despite much lip service to increasing budget outlays on social services, little evidence of a fundamental shift in government spending has emerged. So Chinese households' precautionary saving persists. There is little evidence of a more flexible exchange rate and increased independence of monetary policy that would allow higher domestic interest rates. These and other factors suggest that China's transition toward more consumption-driven growth is likely to be substantially delayed.

Developing countries, especially the poorest, have the most at risk if the Doha Round is not wrapped up this year. If the multilateral negotiations languish, the recent trend toward bilateral and regional trade agreements will accelerate. These arrangements hurt the smallest and poorest countries the most, since they are often excluded. Developing countries would also lose the leverage they gain from negotiating as a group in the multilateral context. Proposals of particular interest to developing countries, including aid for trade and duty- and quota-free treatment for least-developed countries, might also be pulled off the table. Given their experience with the Uruguay Round, it is not surprising that developing countries are waiting for developed countries to offer serious reductions in agricultural protection before making serious offers on nonagricultural market access and services. But developing countries must move, and they must move now.
Difficult and sensitive issues will command the attention of US and Korean officials as they negotiate a bilateral free trade agreement (FTA). The United States will have to put long-standing US barriers to Korean exports of textiles, apparel, and steel on the table and resolve problems with South Korean access to the US visa waiver program. In turn, South Korea will have to open new opportunities for US goods and services, including autos, beef, and rice. Such a deal will pose a stiff political challenge for Korean officials. However, they will be under pressure in any event to reform their farm programs--either in the context of a final deal in the WTO talks or in response to Chinese initiatives in the region, which Korea will need to match. Both Korea and the United States also have important foreign policy interests in the FTA, particularly enhanced security on the Korean peninsula. South Korea would like the FTA to promote the policy of constructive engagement with North Korea, which the former has been pursuing by extending trade preferences to goods produced in the Kaesong industrial complex in North Korea. However, such a request would put the entire negotiation in jeopardy since the US Congress would reject preferences for the North Korean regime.

Russia's chairmanship of the G-8 raises questions about its fitness for the task. While it is certainly a market economy, Russia can no longer lay claims to being even semidemocratic. The G-8 should not be swept up in a celebration of Putin's authoritarian power during the St. Petersburg summit. While there are pitfalls, the G-8 can still accomplish important work if the democratic members work together. These members should convene a mini-summit in a Baltic capital such as Vilnius on their way to St. Petersburg to express support for democracy in Russia and for the sovereignty of the former Soviet republics. They could also address traditional G-7 topics in which Russia has no competence, especially by adding a strong political push to the Doha Round, which cannot be expected from Russia, as it is not yet even a member of the World Trade Organization. The G-8 can also usefully revive the Energy Charter, designed to increase energy security and rational use of energy, and expand its membership to include other large economies, such as China and India.

Trade ministers from member countries of the World Trade Organization (WTO) convened in Hong Kong in December 2005 to jump-start the flagging Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations. The ministerial accomplished more in spirit than in substance and placed more emphasis on negotiating process than on policy reform. The industrial countries offered up kernels of subsidy reform and development assistance, but all the big-ticket items were studiously deferred to future meetings. Progress on nonagricultural market access and services was microscopic. Without substantive offers in these areas, the United States and European Union will not be able to augment their offers on farm reforms. Developing countries are skeptical that the European Union will up the ante in agriculture even if they offer concrete reforms on goods and services trade. In any event, most developing countries are reluctant to lower their own market access barriers. So neither side moves. Trade ministers do not have the political authority to break this "Alphonse and Gaston" routine and approve reforms in sensitive areas that are needed to produce a comprehensive package of accords acceptable to all WTO members. To succeed, the Doha Round needs a political jolt. A trade summit involving heads of state of countries whose policy reforms are crucial to the success of the WTO talks must be convened to break the impasse.

Only together can the United States and Germany keep the global economy integrated-by removing agricultural roadblocks to a WTO deal, coordinating on relations with China, and securing the flow of international investment. The new German chancellor, Angela Merkel, could save the Doha Round by reinterpreting the budget deal just made on agricultural support funds at the EU summit, something US pleas and attempts to shame France cannot achieve. Both countries have an interest in making a common front toward China. If the United States continues to face China alone, the Chinese government is unlikely to move the yuan peg meaningfully. Chancellor Merkel should take advantage of the American bad cop role to play good cop. In particular, under German urging, the eurozone can offer to shift several percent of its shares in the IMF and World Bank to China and other Asians in return for a revaluation of the yuan and a eurozone seat at the institutions. Both President Bush and Chancellor Merkel could also cooperate to defuse mounting economic nationalism that hampers cross-border investment. Merkel should secure opportunities for the export-dependent German economy and advance European integration, and the Bush administration should welcome German leadership and thus validate European partnership in international policy.

The United States is running an increasing risk by allowing its external current account deficit to rise to levels historically unprecedented for the United States and most other industrial countries. This trend can be arrested through a credible program to eliminate the US fiscal deficit by 2010 combined with an accord, like the Plaza Agreement of 1985, to achieve appreciation of a wide array of foreign currencies against the dollar. A Plaza II would help achieve global adjustment in three ways: First, it would resolve the "prisoner's dilemma" for major developing and newly industrialized economies, in which each country acts in isolation to stem a loss of competitiveness, leaving the world as a whole worse off. Second, it would provide a framework for coordinated intervention-dollar sales by the European Central Bank and Bank of Japan and purchases of euros, yen, and possibly other currencies by the Federal Reserve. Third, by including a program for US fiscal adjustment, a Plaza II would assure countries allowing their currencies to rise that the United States, too, was carrying its share of the adjustment burden.

Three propositions have become conventional wisdom in Washington and elsewhere: Americans save too little. The US current account deficit is thus unsustainably large. The Chinese currency must appreciate significantly to bring the global economy into sustainable balance. All these separate but related propositions are highly questionable, the author says. He suggests that Americans save quite enough for future generations, that the startlingly large US current account deficit is not only sustainable but a natural feature of today's highly globalized economy, and that a revaluation of the Chinese currency, far from alleviating global imbalances, would run the risk of precipitating a financial crisis.

Has the biggest sovereign debt default in history passed without answering the urgent legal and policy questions it posed, and with barely a ripple in the global financial markets? So far, pretty much. Lawsuits have not yielded a penny for the creditors. They failed to stop the spring 2005 debt exchange or dent Argentina's recovery. Bondholders failed to stick together; the markets failed to banish a defaulter; and the official sector failed to change the outcome. Thanks to brisk growth and impressive fiscal management in Argentina, the 2001 default seems to be fading into the night. But it is still too early to tell how Argentina might have changed the world. We may not know for years. For now, the revolution must wait.

For their own benefit and that of the rest of the world, East Asia should adopt a basket of currencies as the numeraire for their exchange rates instead of the dollar. It would be particularly advantageous to them if they were all to adopt the same basket. Such a basket would prevent variations in extraregional exchange rates from disrupting the East Asian economies by altering effective exchange rates and the relative competitiveness of the different countries of East Asia.

At the heart of imbalances in the Chinese economy is an unsustainable investment boom that has been in the making for at least four years and that will probably take at least several years to undo, even with good policies. Judging from the unwinding of China's last investment boom, the most likely outcome is that economic growth will decline during this adjustment period-probably on the order of 4 to 5 percentage points from its current rate. Hence, the growth decline will last longer and may be more gradual than some have envisaged, but its cumulative magnitude may not be much less marked.

Japan's Great Recession of the 1990s was the result of fiscal, financial, and monetary policy mistakes cutting off the economy's natural recovery. Economies have a natural tendency to recover from downturns, which is why one speaks of business cycles and why macroeconomic researchers were so interested in Japan's persistent stagnation. It is therefore a pleasure to note how normal the current Japanese recovery is. What changed? There was no structural transformation. The current strong recovery emerged, and has the chance to be ongoing, because the Japanese government got out of the economy's way and did something to recapitalize the banking system.


The Middle East is a demographic time bomb: The economy must grow 5 to 6 percent annually for the next two decades to absorb new entrants to the labor force. The only plausible way for this to occur is through a successful process of cross-border economic integration. Islam itself is not an impediment, but public opinion harbors reservations about globalization. This can create a vicious circle in which insecurity in both its economic and cultural dimensions precludes those measures necessary to accelerate growth. The recent experiences of Saudi Arabia can be read as a cautionary tale: weak economic performance leading to pessimism about the future, possibly counterproductive policy interventions, and bouts of political extremism.

Senator John Kerry has proposed a major overhaul in corporate taxation with the goal of persuading multinational companies (MNCs) to employ more workers at home and fewer abroad. Kerry has correctly emphasized that domestic production is often taxed at a higher rate than production abroad, but his prescriptions would not boost US jobs. Relocating production to the United States is not likely to be the central response to Senator Kerry's proposed tax regime. Instead, MNCs would find ways to avoid the US tax burden. Under Kerry's plan, moreover, foreign-based MNCs would gain further tax advantages over US companies in worldwide markets--giving them a leg up in future expansion. Other tax policy changes would better address the tax tilt toward investment and production abroad. Reforming WTO rules that allow border tax adjustments for indirect taxes but prohibit them for direct taxes would be a far superior response to Senator Kerry's core concern than his own tax proposals. 

Greater respect for the core labor standards could spread the benefits of globalization more broadly, and trade agreements can play a role by focusing attention on labor issues and by encouraging trading partners to reform. Can the labor provisions of CAFTA--the agreement with five Central American countries--play such a role? Elliott argues that weaknesses in CAFTA language require vigorous action on other fronts to encourage labor reform.

During the current agricultural trade negotiations, countries must decide whether to keep trying to incorporate agriculture into the mainstream of trade policy or whether to abandon the attempt and allow countries more flexibility to pursue domestic objectives. Can worthwhile agriculture liberalization emerge in the Doha Round? Josling and Hathaway compare existing proposals and show how they can provide a starting point for renewed negotiations on freer trade in agriculture.

Deeper transformation and wider diffusion of the whole gamut of information technology (IT) throughout the US economy will bring about a second wave of productivity growth. To that end, an international value chain should increasingly produce not only hardware but also software and services, which will lead to a decline in the prices of software and services, thus making the overall IT package affordable for more businesses. While some IT jobs will consequently be performed abroad, the number of higher-paid jobs demanding IT skills is at the same time projected to grow very quickly in the United States. Are US workers prepared to fill those jobs? The US workforce needs the skills and adaptive capabilities to succeed in a global labor market, where fewer and fewer occupational categories can be shielded from foreign competition and where global competitors are spending even more on education relative to their income levels than is the United States.

In May 2003, the WTO dispute panel ruled that US steel safeguards imposed in March 2002 are illegal. The WTO Appellate Body is all but certain to confirm that judgment in November 2003. Then the Bush administration will face a choice. It can keep the safeguards in place, pleasing steel producers and important constituencies. But doing so would further anger steel users, who have lost more business and jobs as a consequence of the safeguards than producers have gained. Alternatively, the Bush administration can revoke the safeguards. This choice would eliminate an unfair tax on steel users and send a powerful and positive signal to the world trading community.

One of the preconditions for entering European Monetary Union (EMU) is that the accession countries achieve exchange rate stability. To this end, they must participate for two years in an exchange rate mechanism known as ERM II, under which they cannot permit their currencies to rise or fall by more than 15 percent from an agreed central rate vis-à-vis the euro. Earlier this year, however, Pedro Solbes, the European commissioner for economic and monetary affairs, said that a stricter test would be used to assess exchange rate stability: the 2¼ percent band that prevailed when the Maastricht Treaty was drafted in 1991. Kenen and Meade urge the European Commission to reconsider this position, which ignores the changes in the economic environment resulting from the creation of EMU itself. They warn that the stricter test would bar the accession countries from availing themselves of the 15 percent band and thus expose those countries to the risk exchange rate crises. Furthermore, it could make it harder for them to achieve price stability-another precondition for entering EMU.

A good proposal to eliminate tariffs must take into account both the pain and gain that developing countries are likely to experience. The authors take the measure of these costs and benefits and urge rich countries to maximize the benefits to developing countries while giving them ample time to accept, and adjust to, the changes that trade liberalization will require. But trade liberalization should not stop with tariff proposals. The United States and other industrial countries should generously reduce subsidies to farmers and eliminate nontariff barriers on agricultural imports. The United States should offer more concessions on services trade, particularly in its allowances for temporary foreign workers. Unless rich countries put more on the table, a WTO agreement to eliminate tariff barriers may be postponed for years.

Earnings stripping occurs when a US subsidiary pays an excessive amount of interest to a related foreign corporation. But these proposals go far beyond dealing with tax-motivated inversion transactions. Proposals by the Bush Administration and Bill Thomas (R-CA) to amend the "earnings stripping" rules are stimulated by the fear that inverting corporations are piling on debt to their new foreign affiliates to avoid taxes, thus eroding the US corporate tax base. They apply across the board to all foreign-based multinational corporations operating in the United States, thus posing a substantial risk of collateral damage to the US economy and US international tax principles that far outweigh any benefits. Congress must therefore avoid these risks and frame a prudent tax policy.
By one reckoning, total US bilateral merchandise trade with countries targeted by extensive sanctions was reduced by as much as $25 billion in 1999. The United States may have lost an additional $6.6 billion in bilateral services trade that same year due to sanctions. But, estimates based on Andrew Rose's gravity model suggest that US bilateral merchandise trade in 1999 was reduced by just $11.5 billion. While the authors estimate that the economic cost to the United States of foreign policy sanctions has probably not increased in the past five years, the absolute level of lost exports and imports remains very high.

While publicly resisting sanctions, North Korea's closest neighbors are trying to engage the United States and North Korea in a carrot-and-stick strategy that could lead to a negotiated resolution to the nuclear crisis. The biggest carrot that the United States brings to the table in the short run is a willingness to allay North Korean security fears in the wake of the US-led invasion of Iraq. In addition, the United States should also be willing to lift remaining, non-security-related economic sanctions, as part of a carefully calibrated, verifiable, and reciprocal agreement. Elsewhere (except for Cuba), President Bush promotes increased trade as a mechanism for promoting democracy as well as prosperity. Why not in North Korea?

After losing considerable momentum late last year, global economic recovery is likely to accelerate in the second half of 2003 and beyond--real fourth quarter to fourth quarter (Q4/Q4) global GDP growth will likely be 3¼ percent this year, about the same as last year. Higher world oil prices, fall-off in equity prices, and weak consumer sentiment slowed activity in the run-up to the US-led invasion of Iraq, but rapid victory is likely to reverse these developments. A plausible estimate of the negative impact of the Iraq war on world GDP for 2003 is about half of 1 percent of GDP--or about $200 billion. The author forecasts US Q4/Q4 growth at 2¾ percent and US year-over-year growth at 2¼ percent. Again led by China, last year's star performer, Asia, will continue its strong performance in 2003 and 2004, although Japanese growth (Q4/Q4) will fall to 1 percent this year before picking up to 2 percent during 2004. This year should see a marked improvement in growth in Latin America. Growth will remain subdued in most of Western Europe, with the German economy, Europe's most sluggish, repeating its 2002 performance.

Hufbauer and Goodrich review the good, the bad, and the ugly dimensions of US steel policy in 2001 and 2002. On balance, the policy has not been nearly as helpful to the US steel industry as partisans hoped. Moreover, the policy should be dramatically changed to avoid potentially ugly trade conflicts. The authors recommend ways both to averting these conflicts and to achieve a lasting solution to the problems that beset the steel industry.

The global economic recovery is continuing but at a somewhat slower pace than was anticipated six months ago. Specifically, using the country weights from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook, the fore-cast for real GDP growth in the world economy during 2002 (i.e., on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis) is cut by about half a percentage point to 3 percent—a pace that is slightly below my estimate of the potential growth rate for world GDP.1This downward revision reflects primarily slower growth than earlier expected during the first half of 2002 in most industrial countries and the expectation that growth will remain somewhat more sluggish than earlier expected at least through year-end. For 2003, the forecast for global economic growth is also cut by about half a percent-age point—to 4 percent—reflecting both general factors suggesting slightly weaker performance in many industrial and developing countries and the particular economic risks arising from possible military action against Iraq and from potential credit events affecting key developing countries. Despite these downward revisions, however, there is little doubt that the world economy will see significant improvement this year from the 1 percent growth recorded in 2001, and it is still reasonable to expect further improvement to a growth rate modestly above global potential during 2003.
Slower than anticipated recovery during the first half of 2002 was particularly apparent in the industrial countries, especially the three largest industrial countries; and the main issue for global growth prospects is whether this performance will improve going forward. For the United States, the key questions are how well will the growth of consumption spending be sustained in the face of relatively weak employment gains and falling equity prices, but rising real estate values and very low interest rates? (2) when and to what extent will gains in business fixed investment takeover from recovery of inventory investment as a principal driver of domestic demand? and (3) in the face of a somewhat weaker dollar, how much will further deterioration of US net exports weigh on US GDP growth? For Western Europe, the main question is what will stimulate a somewhat more rapid pace of domestic demand growth, especially in view of the apparent unwillingness of the key monetary authority to supply further stimulus and the constraint on fiscal expansion implied by the Growth and Stability Pact and by longer-run concerns about the fiscal situations of most Western European governments? For Japan, the main question is much the same as for Western Europe—only much more pressing because of the very limited room for stimulative policy and because of the concerns about the fragilities of the financial sector and the urgent need to pursue critical structural reforms to lay a foundation for sustained growth? For those industrial countries that have performed somewhat better than expected, notably Australia and Canada, the question is how long this superior performance can be sustained if there is no strengthening of growth in the largest industrial countries?
Gary Clyde Hufbauer is Reginald Jones Senior Fellow at the Institute for International Economics. He is coauthor of Economic Sanctions Reconsidered, 3rd ed. (forthcoming), World Capital Markets: Challenge to the G-10 (2001), and Using Sanctions to Fight Terrorism, International Economics Policy Brief 01-11 (2001). Barbara Oegg is a research associate at the Institute for International Economics. She is coauthor of Using Sanctions to Fight Terrorism, International Economics Policy Brief 01-11 (2001).
The House and Senate will soon meet in conference to decide whether to enact unprecedented sanctions that would deny access to US capital markets to foreign companies that do business with a sanctioned nation. The narrow objective of the Sudan Peace Act-the House version of which includes these capital-market sanctions-is to persuade the Sudanese government to enter into peace negotiations. Its broader but unstated objective is to enlarge the scope of "acceptable" sanctions. This is a new idea, a bad idea, and a frontier that should not be crossed.
The House version of the Sudan Peace Act (H.R. 2052), which was approved by an overwhelming margin (422-2) in June 2001, requires the president to use the International Emergency Economic Powers Act to "prohibit any entity engaged in development of the oil and gas sector in Sudan from raising capital in the United States or from trading its securities (or depository receipts with respect to its securities) in any capital market in the United States."1 The legislation also requires that entities engaged in any commercial activity in Sudan disclose the nature and extent of these activities to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
The broader but unstated
objective of the Sudan Peace Act
is to enlarge the scope
of "acceptable" sanctions.
This is a new idea,
a bad idea, and a frontier that
should not be crossed.
The Senate version of the legislation (S. 180), favored by the White House, omits the capital-market sanctions provision as well as the disclosure requirements. Several Republican senators are currently blocking a House-Senate conference aimed at ironing out the differences between the two bills by holding up the appointment of Senate conferees (the House appointed its conferees in late 2001).2
US companies are already barred from doing business with Sudan under a 1997 Executive Order. Thus the capital-market sanctions and disclosure provisions will only affect foreign companies-specifically Canadian oil company Talisman Energy Inc., Swedish oil company Lundin AB, and China National Petroleum Company.
Stripped to its essence,
the House version of
the Sudan Peace Act reflects
a distressingly familiar pattern
in the recent history of
US economic sanctions.
Stripped to its essence, the House version (H.R. 2052) reflects a distressingly familiar pattern in the recent history of US economic sanctions. In an effort to change the objectionable behavior of a foreign country, the United States first imposes unilateral economic sanctions. Frustrated by the target country's defiance and the lack of cooperation by allies and trading partners, the US Congress then seeks to extend the reach of unilateral US measures by imposing secondary sanctions on firms located in third countries. In the 1990s, Congress passed the Helms-Burton Act targeting foreign companies that invest in Cuba, and the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act (ILSA) seeking to prevent European companies from investing in the oil sector in Iran and Libya. The extraterritorial scope of these measures irritated key US allies; as a result neither the Helms-Burton Act nor the ILSA has ever been enforced.
Preventing foreign-based companies that invest in Sudan from raising capital in the United States will substantially diminish the oil revenues that allow the Khartoum government to prolong an 18-year old civil war-so argue the proponents of capital-market sanctions. However, the success of capital-market sanctions in achieving their stated foreign policy goals hinges on three questionable assumptions: 1) that the companies will actually pull out of Sudan and not simply choose to list on non-US financial markets instead; 2) that the impact of the sanctions will be felt by the Sudanese government rather than by the foreign companies against which the sanctions are imposed; and 3) that political change will follow the hoped-for economic impact. All three assumptions are problematic.
Even if the costs associated with exclusion from US capital markets force Talisman and Lundin to pull out of Sudan, there may be other companies willing and able to take their place. Moreover, several Sudanese nongovernmental organizations have voiced concerns that the two Western companies might be replaced by companies from countries less sensitive to corporate responsibilities and human rights, and thus less likely to raise these issues with the Sudanese government.3
The involvement of the China National Petroleum Company in Sudan poses other issues. Past US sanctions against the Chinese government to improve human rights and stop nuclear proliferation there have not been overly successful. China sees itself as a great power, alongside the United States and Russia. It is not to be "bullied" by the United States. Given the strategic importance of oil for China, the likelihood that economic sanctions will be more successful this time around is not high.
The proponents of capital-market sanctions confuse economic effectiveness of sanctions with political effectiveness. A survey by the Institute for International Economics of economic sanctions imposed in the 20th century shows that sanctions can be very effective in interrupting economic relations yet fall short of their foreign policy goals.4 The discrepancy between economic and political effectiveness may be even more pronounced in cases where effectiveness depends upon the conduct of third parties. Experience with the Helms-Burton Act and the ILSA suggests a skeptical attitude toward the efficacy of secondary sanctions.
Prohibiting access to US capital
markets as a secondary sanction
in the case of Sudan would
set a dangerous precedent.
Prohibiting access to US capital markets as a secondary sanction in the case of Sudan would set a dangerous precedent. The claim made by supporters of capital-market sanctions-that they do not impose any costs on the US economy-is misleading. Restrictions on capital markets would run counter to the US commitment to open markets and the free flow of capital. Interfering with these markets for foreign policy purposes would, over time, provide a serious disincentive for foreign companies to list on US securities exchanges and result in their moving financing from New York to London, Frankfurt, or Tokyo. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan argued that, despite the predominance of US capital markets, it is a mistake to assume that the United States could successfully block the capability of China or any other country to raise capital at essentially the same terms abroad.
The claim made by supporters of
capital-market sanctions-that they
do not impose any costs on
the US economy-is misleading.
In his testimony before the Senate Banking Committee on July 24, 2001, Greenspan said that the efficient and sophisticated US capital markets are a crucial ingredient of US economic success. Undercutting the viability of these markets has the potential to harm long-term US growth.
Sudan by itself is no more than a footnote in the sanctions debate. But the precedent set by the Sudan Peace Act would open the door for a variety of "one-cause" or "one-country" lobbies to invoke capital-market sanctions. Citing his concern about nuclear proliferation, Senator Helms has already introduced legislation (S. 1307) that would bar Chinese state-owned companies from listing on the US exchanges. Expansion of the Helms-Burton Act and the ILSA to include capital-market sanctions would almost certainly follow the Sudan Peace Act if it became law.
Press coverage on the Sudan Peace Act hinted at a possible House-Senate conference compromise that would maintain the disclosure requirements but drop the capital-market sanctions provisions. But even disclosure legislation is unnecessary. Disclosure by companies doing business with Sudan is already required under a guidance issued by acting SEC Chair Laura Unger in May 2001. The SEC guidance requires foreign companies listed on US capital markets to disclose "material business in, or with, countries, governments, or entities with which US companies would be prohibited from doing business under economic sanctions administered by OFAC."5 The SEC mandate that foreign corporations supply investors the requisite information about their dealings in all US-sanctioned countries is clearly preferable to the Sudan legislation that targets individual countries and companies.
Expansion of the Helms-Burton Act
and the ILSA to include
capital-market sanctions would
almost certainly follow the Sudan
Peace Act if it became law.
On September 6, 2001, President Bush appointed former Senator John Danforth as special envoy to Sudan to explore ways in which the United States can play a useful role in bringing about lasting peace in Sudan.6 Since his appointment Danforth has undertaken two missions to Sudan and a mission to consult with key European allies. His efforts led, for example, to a cease-fire agreement in the Nuba mountain region in January 2002.7 In his May 2002 report to the president, Danforth argues that despite the many remaining obstacles, a negotiated settlement of the decade-old civil war is possible in the near term. More time should be given for the administration's initiatives to work. Meanwhile, Congress should shelve its unprecedented restrictions on US capital markets.
Notes
1. H.R. 2052, Sec. 9. Prohibition on Trading in the United States Capital Markets.
2. Inside US Trade, January 11, 2002.
3. Washington Post, June 24, 2001, A15.
4. Preliminary data drawn from research completed for the third edition of Economic Sanctions Reconsidered show that only 29 percent of economic sanctions succeeded in achieving their stated foreign policy goals in the 1990s. The success rate for US unilateral sanctions is even lower-only 18 percent of unilateral economic sanctions imposed in the 1990s were successful.
5. Acting SEC Chair Laura Unger in a letter to Congressman Frank P. Wolf, May 8, 2001. As of May 14, 2002, the Treasury's Office of Foreign Asset Control (OFAC), administers sanctions against the following list of countries, governments, and entities: Burma/Myanmar, Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Liberia, Libya, North Korea, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Taliban (Afghanistan), UNITA (Angola), and Syria (under Terrorism Sanctions Regulations).
6. White House Press Release, September 6, 2001.
7. USIS, May 14, 2002.

After more than a decade of economic stagnation and minimal structural change, Japan stands on the brink of outright financial crisis—the only debate is whether the Japanese government can dodge its imminent economic threats for another six months at most, or ride the wave of global expansion to throw still more money at these problems with decreasing effectiveness until the public debt becomes unsustainable (which should be no later than 2005). Either way, volatility in Japanese asset markets will be extremely high for the next 36 months, with significant declines on average in asset prices and the yen.
Japanese savers remain highly riskaverse and this puts a drag on change in general and provides a buffer for policy mistakes—their passivity should not be exaggerated, however, and cannot be depended upon to stave off crisis. In the last six months, in anticipation of deposit insurance limits and bank failures, over ¥100 trillion in household savings has been moved from weaker banks to cash, gold, offshore accounts, and the four “too-big-to-fail” merged banks. Given the ongoing drain of liquidity from Japanese asset markets, the movement of even a few percent more of household savings, along with the remaining mobile international capital in Japan, could produce large declines in asset prices. Such movements would rapidly intensify both the current credit crunch for Japanese smalland medium-sized enterprises and the Japanese government’s mounting fiscal difficulties.
A reasonable baseline forecast for the Japanese economy is for modest growth, driven by exports of manufactures and the end of the inventory cycle. I argued in early 2001, however, that the Japanese government then faced a choice between decisive preemptive action and outright financial crisis. But no decisive action has been taken since the Koizumi cabinet took office in April 2001. Therefore, the downside risks make it very unlikely that the baseline forecast will be achieved—in fact, the Japanese economy is likely to tumble into crisis sometime before the Diet’s supplemental budget process begins in September 2002. This reflects Japan’s increasing vulnerability to shocks, now that it is caught in the tightening vise of debt-deflation and fiscal erosion. There is no shortage of potential triggers for such a crisis in coming months. One most likely trigger would be contingent claims becoming explicit on the government balance sheet, the impact of which would be amplified by policy mistakes. A crisis in Japan would not be Argentina redux, but it would have severe consequences for the country and the world economy.
Crisis in Japan is not yet inevitable. A comprehensive policy package of bank closures and recapitalization, money-financed Bank of Japan (BoJ) purchases of long-term Japanese government bonds (JGBs), and replacement of public works spending with tax cuts could still save the Japanese economy from this fate. By putting distressed assets back on the market and removing uncertainty, asset markets would soar and Japan would grow at or above potential for an extended period (2.5 percent plus per annum). Increased explicit pressure from the US and other governments could somewhat increase the chances of such a policy package being adopted. This policy brief makes the sober but realistic assumption, however, that there will be no meaningful change in Japanese economic policy until a crisis hits, and actions taken then will likely be too late to forestall the negative impact.

Michael Mussa, senior fellow, served as economic counselor and director of the research department at the International Monetary Fund from 1991 to 2001. He served as a member of the US Council of Economic Advisers from August 1986 to September 1988, and was a faculty member of the Graduate School of Business of the University of Chicago (1976-91) and the department of economics at the University of Rochester (1971-76). He has written extensively on international economics, macroeconomics, monetary economics, and municipal finance.
Overview
The world economy will see a significant recovery of growth in 2002 and 2003, reversing the global slowdown of last year. The global economic recovery will be led by the United States where a vigorous cyclical rebound is already under way. Economic growth will also strengthen in western Europe during 2002; however, recovery will slightly lag that of the United States and will likely proceed at a more subdued pace. For Japan, the risks remain substantial, but a modest-paced cyclical upturn beginning by mid-2002 and extending through 2003 appears to be the most likely outcome. Among the other industrial countries, Australia should sustain its relatively strong growth performance at least through 2002, while economic growth in Canada should pick up roughly in line with that in the United States. Most developing countries, too, can expect significant strengthening of economic growth as the global economy recovers-Mexico and the emerging-market economies of Asia are likely to benefit particularly from US economic recovery and central and eastern European countries are likely to get a boost from stronger growth in western Europe.
On a year-over-year basis, the pick-up in global growth between 2001 and 2002 appears quite modest-from an estimated 2¼ percent last year to only a projected 2¾ percent this year (see table 1). However, these year-over-year growth rates conceal the sharp acceleration of growth during 2002 in comparison with the very sluggish growth during 2001. In particular, for the United States the underlying forecast has real GDP rising during 2002 (measured on a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter basis) to about 4 percent, versus barely ½ percent growth of real GDP during 2001. The year-over-year results, however, show a much more modest acceleration of growth, from 1¼ percent last year to 2½ percent this year. For western Europe, the year-over-year growth rates show essentially no pick-up between 2001 and 2002; whereas the underlying forecast has real GDP growth on a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter basis accelerating from under 1 percent to 2½ percent. Sharply negative growth during 2001 (particularly in the fourth quarter) keeps the year-over-year forecast for Japanese growth in 2002 in negative territory; whereas the forecast has fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter growth at nearly 2 percent during 2002 versus -2 percent during 2001.
Table 1: Summary of global growth prospects
(percent changes in real GDP)
 

Year/year


Q4/Q4

 
2001
2002
2003
2001
2002
2003
Industrial countries
1
1½
3¼
¼
3¼
3¼
   United States
1¼
2½
4
½
4
4
   Western Europe
1½
1½
2¾
¾
2½
3
   Japan
-½
-½
2
-2
1¾
2
Developing countries
3½
3¾
6
2¼
4¼
6
World (WEO weights)
2¼
2¾
4½
1¼
3¾
4½
In many countries, especially developing countries, quarterly GDP estimates are not very reliable. This explains why table 2 on global growth prospects at the end of this brief, like many other forecasts of global growth, reports projections only on a year-over-year basis for developing countries. On that basis, growth for developing countries is projected to rise only very modestly from 3½ percent for 2001 to 3¾ percent for 2002, and then to accelerate to 6 percent for 2003. However, by making use of quarterly GDP estimates where they are available and by making plausible inferences from annual figures where quarterly data are not available, it is reasonable to infer that growth during 2001 in developing countries was about 2¼ percent. Growth during 2002 in developing countries is forecast to accelerate to 4¼ percent and then pick up to 6 percent during 2003.
On a year-over-year basis, world economic growth (using the relative country weights from the IMF's World Economic Outlook) is expected to pick up modestly from about 2¼ percent in 2001 to about 2¾ percent. Taking into account the results for the industrial countries and my estimates for developing countries, global growth during 2001 was only about 1¼ percent, and it will accelerate to about 3¾ percent during 2002 and to 4½ percent during 2003.
I estimate the potential growth rate for the world economy to be about 3½ percent. I would classify last year-with growth during the year about 2 percentage points below global potential (and the slowest in a decade)-as a global growth recession. The world economy is forecast to begin a new global economic expansion in 2002, which should gather pace in 2003 and hopefully last considerably longer.
Three main forces will drive the recovery in global economic growth: (1) the normal processes of cyclical recovery, in particular those associated with a sharp turnaround of inventory investment, followed by an upturn in business fixed investment; (2) substantial policy stimulus arising primarily from the easing of monetary policies last year in virtually all industrial countries, especially the aggressive easing undertaken by the US Federal Reserve; and (3) the tendency for roughly simultaneous recovery in different regions of the world economy to be mutually reinforcing. All three forces now appear to be operating or starting to operate, implying considerable confidence in projections of a global economic recovery.
A year ago, it was clear that the US economy was slowing significantly below its potential growth rate, and the Federal Reserve had begun to cut policy interest rates. The likely extent and duration of the slowdown in the United States, however, were not yet fully appreciated (even allowing for the negative surprise from the events of September 11). For most of the rest of the world, the likely extent of the global slowdown was not recognized. In particular, it was not understood that the same forces producing the slowdown in the US economy were operating much more broadly and the global economic slowdown would be mutually reinforcing across different regions. Now that process is going into reverse, and once again, the US economy is a leading indicator-this time of global recovery.
As always, of course, there are risks. A major terrorist outrage on the scale of September 11 or larger, could undermine confidence and potentially abort recovery. A sustained upsurge in world oil prices arising from political/military events in the Middle East could impair growth and increase global inflation. However, barring a major noneconomic shock, global recovery for at least this year and next appears reasonably well assured. Subdued inflationary pressures are a key reason for such confidence. Monetary policies that were eased very substantially to resist recession will surely need to be tightened significantly as the economic recovery gathers strength. But, there is no apparent need to undertake aggressive tightening that would threaten to stall recovery at an early stage-producing a so-called "double dip." Rather, the main risks for the global recovery concern how strong it is likely to be and how successfully it can be sustained beyond the next two years. These risks are most usefully discussed in light of the somewhat differing conditions, prospects, and policy issues in different regions of the world economy.

The Americas
After supporting global economic expansion through most of the 1990s, the sharp slowdown of the US economy beginning around mid-2000 led the world economy into the global growth recession of last year. Now, cyclical recovery of the US economy from the brief and shallow recession of 2001 will be a key factor contributing to renewed global economic expansion. Somewhat surprisingly, US real GDP shifted to modest growth in the final quarter of 2001, after only one quarter of modest decline. Preliminary indications suggest that real GDP growth strengthened considerably in the first quarter of 2002, indicating that the process of cyclical recovery is now well under way.
Usually in cyclical recoveries, real GDP growth during the first year exceeds the longer-run potential growth rate of the US economy. The strong productivity results for the US economy in recent years (including the continuation of substantial productivity gains since the slowdown began in mid-2000) suggest that the longer-run potential growth rate of the US economy is better than 3 percent and perhaps as high as 3½ or even 4 percent. Thus, with cyclical recovery now clearly under way, it would be reasonable, based on normal cyclical dynamics, to expect that real GDP growth during 2002 would be around 4 to 5 percent or perhaps somewhat higher.
Indeed, a rebound of inventory investment from minus $120 billion in the fourth quarter of 2001 to a modest positive level of plus $30 billion by the fourth quarter of 2002 would, by itself, contribute more than 1½ percent to real GDP growth during 2002. Even a partial recovery of business fixed investment from the sharp declines of last year could easily add another $50 billion to $80 billion to real GDP growth this year (probably concentrated primarily in the second half). Personal consumption expenditures held up very well last year despite the economic slowdown, and surely should be expected to continue to grow in a more robust economy. The strong gain in consumption at the end of last year (reflecting primarily very strong auto sales), however, suggests that real consumption spending this year should advance somewhat less than proportionately with the gain in real GDP. All things considered, the rise in real consumption spending might reasonably be expected to contribute $150 billion to $250 billion to real GDP growth during 2002. Government purchases of goods and services will likely make no more than a modest contribution to real GDP growth, as spending at the federal level continues to rise but state and local governments are constrained by budgetary pressures. Further deterioration of US net exports will make a negative contribution to US real GDP growth (of perhaps $60 billion to $120 billion) as the US economy helps, once again, to drive recovery in the rest of the world. Adding it up, this suggests an increase in real GDP during 2002 of between $280 billion and $420 billion, or a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter growth rate of real GDP between 3 and 4½ percent; and I would shade the point forecast up from the mid-point of 3¾ percent to an even 4 percent.
Looking further ahead to 2003, the inventory rebound should be largely complete. Growth during the year will reflect continued growth of personal consumption spending about in line with real GDP growth (in contrast to a growth rate of real personal consumption spending during 2002, which will likely be moderately below the growth rate of real GDP). By next year, a significant recovery in business fixed investment should be gathering steam. And, the drag on US growth from further deterioration in net exports should be ameliorated by the acceleration of growth in the rest of the world. Annualized real GDP growth slightly above 4 percent at the start of the year, tapering down toward 3 percent by late 2002 is consistent with a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter forecast of 4 percent growth and a year-over-year forecast of slightly over 4 percent for 2003.
Of course, even without further terrorist outrages, there are factors that could keep real growth this year below 3 percent. While inventory investment must almost surely shoot back to positive levels, a recovery in fixed investment is more questionable. Capacity utilization rates are low, and a recovery in corporate profits that would help to stimulate business fixed investment is not necessarily assured. Meanwhile, residential investment could be vulnerable as the Federal Reserve moves to tighten monetary policy. If the recovery in corporate profits lags while interest rates are rising, equity values (which remain high relative to corporate earnings and other standards of valuation) could correct downward, with negative effects on both consumption and investment. And, if recovery in the rest of the world lags, this would not be good for US exports.
On the other hand, real GDP growth above 4½ percent, or even 5 percent, during this year is also a possible outcome. In addition to the usual tendency for real GDP growth to exceed potential in the early stages of a cyclical recovery, it must be recognized that both monetary and fiscal policies (at the federal level) are unusually stimulative. At 1¾ percent, the federal funds rate is at its lowest level ever and (measured relative to the core CPI inflation expectations embodied in indexed treasury securities) is negative in real terms. The treasury yield curve has a very steep positive slope. The monetary aggregates are growing very rapidly. Tax cuts and increasing federal purchases are adding further stimulus. Indeed, taking account of all the policy stimuli, I would shade up the central forecast of real GDP growth during 2002 from 3¾ percent to 4 percent. I would not, however, go above 4 percent at this time as it is important for the central forecast to allow for meaningful risks both on the upside and on the downside.
My main worries about the US economy (aside from possible noneconomic shocks) do not concern recovery this year or its likely continuation next year, but rather what may happen in 2004 and thereafter. In particular, despite the downturn in equity values over the past two years, stock prices remain high relative to corporate earnings and most standards of sustainable valuations. However, recognizing that equity markets are volatile and some downward correction in stock prices is certainly possible, a recovering US economy supported by relatively easy monetary and fiscal policies seems unlikely to be the environment that would engender a stock market collapse. Something more fundamental would need to go wrong in order to induce a major stock market decline and/or to threaten a sustained economic expansion. On this score, there are three main worries.
First, as the US economy gathers forward momentum over the next year and a half or so, the Federal Reserve will face the delicate task of shifting the stance of monetary policy from highly stimulative to neutral or even moderately restrictive. Too much tightening too soon will slow down the economy too much late next year and during 2004, even though there remains no inflationary threat. But, too little tightening too late will allow inflationary pressures to build up and later necessitate sharp monetary tightening that might throw the economy back into recession.
And, it may be particularly difficult to judge how much monetary tightening at what pace is needed to hit the desirable middle ground. Experience in the 1990s suggests that a federal funds rate of 5¼ to 5¾ percent is "neutral," in the sense that it will accommodate and support real GDP growth in line with potential when core CPI inflation is running about 2½ percent. Is this experience still relevant? Is it right to think that raising the federal funds rate from 1¾ percent to about 5½ percent over the course of a year or 18 months when the economy is recovering toward potential is essentially restoring monetary policy to a neutral stance-or, is such an increase in the federal funds rate likely to be a much tighter policy than keeping the rate at about 5½ percent when the economy is growing in line with potential? Will the favorable factors that helped to keep inflation relatively low in the late 1990s, despite very low unemployment, continue to operate in 2003 and beyond? The Federal Reserve will need to find the right answers to such questions-and persuade financial markets that it has the right answers-if monetary policy is to help navigate the course of the US economy over the next three or four years as successfully as it has for the past decade.
Second, partly by design and partly by accident, expansionary fiscal policy at the federal level helped cushion the recession of last year and will help to spur recovery this year. The substantial budget surpluses that built up before the recession provided room for this discretionary fiscal stimulus-in contrast to the budgetary situation that prevailed at the time of the previous recession in 1990-91. Now, however, the federal budget is once again in deficit (although not nearly to the same extent as in 1990-91); and, notwithstanding any projections or pronouncements to the contrary, neither the Administration nor the Congress shows any inclination to move the budget back into surplus any time soon. Accordingly, if the US economy gets into difficulty in the next few years, there will not be the budgetary room that there was this time to use discretionary fiscal policy in a counter-cyclical manner.
Third, there are substantial and related imbalances in the US economy that have not been corrected in the recession and potentially pose important problems in the future. The US national savings rate is low and a substantial net inflow of foreign savings is necessary to finance US domestic investment. This foreign capital inflow, which corresponds (approximately) to the US current account deficit, will probably need to grow as US investment recovers during the expansion. Large amounts of foreign capital continue to flow to the United States because foreigners see the United States as an attractive place to invest. These voluntary capital flows into the United States keep the US dollar strong in foreign exchange markets; and the strong dollar, in turn, helps to produce the current account deficit that is the necessary counterpart of the capital inflow. Strong productive growth in the US economy plays an important role in keeping all of this going. Saving can remain low if US households continue to enjoy gains in income and wealth due to rising productivity. Investment can remain strong if rapid productivity growth keeps profits rising despite limited increases in product prices and in the face of rising real wages. Foreign capital will continue to be attracted by the opportunity to participate in the gains from rising productivity; and the dollar will remain relatively strong. However, the United States cannot continue indefinitely to add to its net foreign liability position at a rate of 4 or 5 percent of GDP. At some point, a correction must come; and this correction could be disruptive for the US economy and also for the rest of the world if it occurs too rapidly.
Turning briefly to Canada, the economy has been following a path that is similar to its large southern neighbor. With the sharp slowdown in growth last year, the Bank of Canada considerably eased monetary policy, although not as aggressively as the Federal Reserve. Most indicators now point to a cyclical recovery. The timing of this recovery looks to be only marginally behind that of the United States. The strength of the recovery may also be just slightly below that of the United States.
A similar story applies to the United States' southern neighbor, Mexico.
Unsustainably rapid growth in 2000 led to monetary tightening by the Bank of Mexico. The resulting domestic cyclical correction was augmented by the spillover effects of the sharp slowdown north of the border, and the Mexican economy shrank slightly on a year-over-year basis in 2001 (in comparison with 1¼ percent positive year-over-year growth for the US economy). Now, aided by policy easing in Mexico, by recovery north of the border, and by foreign capital inflows at attractive terms, the Mexican economy is set for recovery. The timing of recovery may slightly lag that of the United States', but by 2003 Mexico's economic growth should once again exceed its northern neighbor's. Substantial inflows of both direct and portfolio investment will help to finance the recovery of the Mexican economy and keep the peso strong. At some point, a downward correction of the peso will probably be needed as part of the process of reducing the current account deficit, but this should be feasible without the disruptions that have accompanied previous corrections.
In South America, the situation is more uncertain and more worrying. With sovereign default, the collapse of the Convertibility Plan, the general insolvency of the banking system, and the disintegration of much of the institutional underpinnings of a modern market economy, Argentina is in the midst of its greatest economic crisis of the past half-century, if not indeed its entire history since independence. Already in the fourth year of recession, with the economy and financial system in chaos, it is speculative to estimate by how much real GDP may decline further this year-and a reliable figure may never be available. Optimistically, I assume that the year-over-year decline in real GDP for 2002 will be between 10 and 15 percent and that recovery will begin soon enough to produce year-over-year growth of plus 3 percent for 2003-but who really knows?
Fortunately, the spillover effects from the catastrophe in Argentina have been limited. Uruguay, of course, is feeling the impact; and its economy will likely shrink modestly this year. Chile too will feel some effect, and this is a key reason to expect that growth this year will only be about half the average rate of the past decade, before picking up again next year. Colombia, Peru, and Venezuela should feel little effect from Argentina, but domestic economic and political difficulties (and the effects of the global slowdown) will likely keep growth subdued in Colombia and Peru, while real GDP may well contract this year in Venezuela (despite the benefits of higher oil prices).
The major question for Latin America (aside from the uncertainties about Argentina) is the likely performance of the Brazilian economy-which accounts for 40 percent of Latin America's GDP. After recovering relatively strongly from the recession of 1998-99 (associated with the defense and collapse of Brazil's previous crawling peg exchange rate regime), the Brazilian economy slowed to only 1½ percent growth last year, partly reflecting the global economic slowdown and spillover effects from events in Argentina. With growth sluggish in the second half of last year due to external influences and the lagged effect of monetary tightening to resist excessive depreciation of the real, year-over-year growth for 2002 is likely to be subdued (about 2 percent). The key question for Brazil is whether growth will reaccelerate during 2002-03 as global growth recovers, or whether uncertainties arising from the October elections and spillovers from Argentina may provoke a crisis of confidence in the sustainability of Brazil's debt dynamics, leading to another economic downturn.
The fact is that, for an emerging-market country, Brazil has a relatively high ratio of public debt to GDP. Most of this debt is either quite short-term, has floating interest rates that adjust rapidly to movements in short-term market rates, is denominated in foreign currency, or has some combination of these features. This implies that if for any reason (including rising doubts about Brazil's ability to meet its debt service obligations), interest rates on Brazilian debt rise or the foreign exchange value of the real falls, Brazil's debt service burden and/or the ratio of debt to GDP will rise-contributing to worries that debt dynamics may be unsustainable. Moreover, Brazil has a relatively small share of exports in GDP and, accordingly, is dependent on a continuing inflow of foreign capital to finance a significant current account deficit and also to finance a continuing rollover of substantial foreign indebtedness. Thus, apart from possible concerns about the stability of public sector debt dynamics, there are also potential concerns about the financing of Brazil's external payments. If confidence is lost in either of these key areas, a crisis would likely ensue, and Brazil's growth prospects for 2003 would be seriously undermined.
As an optimist, I assume that chances are three to one that Brazil will navigate through the difficulties of 2002 without a crisis, and growth next year will surge ahead at a 5 percent rate or greater. But, there is also at least a modest chance that Brazil may be caught up in a crisis. I would not anticipate a catastrophic crisis (like Argentina), but quite possibly a crisis that would produce zero or somewhat negative real GDP growth for 2003.

Europe
The economy of Europe is dominated by the twelve countries that make up the euro area. The same factors that helped to induce the slowdown of the US economy in 2001 (tighter monetary policy in 1999-2000, the build-up and subsequent unwinding of the investment bubble in telecoms and high-tech, and higher oil prices in 1999-2000) also contributed to a significant slowdown of growth in the euro area-from a year-over-year growth rate of 3½ percent for 2000 to 1½ percent for 2001. The slowdown of growth was less in the euro area than in the United States-reflecting the fact that the preceding boom was smaller and the tightening of monetary policy did not proceed as far. The largest economy in the euro area, Germany, was also the most sluggish last year. With a year-over-year growth rate of only about ½ percent (versus year-over-year growth of 1¼ percent for the United States) and a couple of quarters of negative growth, 2001 should probably be classified as a recession year for Germany. The euro area as a whole, however, skirted the edge of outright recession last year, although it recorded modestly negative growth in the final quarter. Nevertheless, it is relevant to think of the euro area as experiencing a growth recession last year. This is likely to be followed by cyclical recovery in 2002-03, driven by a dynamic process that is qualitatively similar to that operating in the United States.
In the first year of cyclical recovery, growth normally exceeds potential, which for the euro area appears to be a real GDP growth rate between 2¼ and 2½ percent. With indicators for the euro area suggesting that recovery probably began in the first quarter but probably was not yet at full speed, a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter growth forecast for this year of 2¾ percent seems reasonable, with the prospect that growth during 2003 could be slightly stronger. Because the euro area economy was very weak in the second half of this year, the year-over-year growth forecast for this year is only about 1½ percent, rising to 2¾ percent for 2003.
These forecasts leave some room for both upside and downside surprises. On the upside, the normal process of cyclical recovery together with the lagged effect of monetary easing in 2001 by the European Central Bank (ECB) could push real GDP growth up to 3½ percent during 2002. Growth at this pace, however, would likely induce the ECB to move relatively early to reverse the easing in 2001, with the likely result that growth during 2003 would slow to no more than potential. On the downside, because the extent of policy stimulus already in the pipeline is far smaller in the euro area than in the United States, there is greater reason to worry that the pace of recovery could prove disappointing. Even if the ECB responded to this situation with further monetary easing (which is far from a certainty), the lagged effect would probably not have much effect on euro area growth until 2003.
Aside from the possibility of noneconomic shocks (e.g., terrorist attacks or political events that might induce a large increase in world oil prices), the risks to achieving moderate-paced recovery in the euro area this year and next seem relatively small. This includes the risks associated with economic policies. With elections in both Germany and France, and with recovery holding the promise that fiscal deficits will remain within the limits prescribed by the Stability and Growth Pact, fiscal policy is unlikely to be a drag on recovery (beyond, or even up to, the operation of the automatic stabilizers). Because the ECB reacted far less aggressively than the Federal Reserve to the economic slowdown last year, the ECB was less successful in cushioning the economy from the forces tending to depress economic activity (forces that were significantly weaker than those tending to depress activity in the United States). Now, the benefit is that the ECB faces a less challenging task in moving monetary policy gradually back to a neutral stance. However, if the ECB behaves asymmetrically-easing timidly in the face of a weakening economy and tightening aggressively in the face of a strengthening economy-then there would be a policy risk to achieving maximum sustainable growth with reasonable price stability in the euro area.
In the United Kingdom, deft management of monetary policy and fortunate timing of fiscal policy have helped to produce the most stable economic performance among the major industrial countries in recent years. Policy resisted the boom of 1999-2000 and policy cushioned the UK economy from the slowdown of 2001 more successfully than in either the United States or the euro area. Now, with only a limited margin of slack in the UK economy, policy appears well-positioned to support growth in line with or slightly above potential, while keeping inflation close to its targeted rate. This suggests a forecast of real GDP growth of 2¼ to 2¾ percent during both 2002 and 2003. Taking account of the slowdown that did occur last year, the forecast for year-over-year growth is moderately weaker for this year (at 2¼ percent) than for next year (at 2½ percent).
The smaller industrial countries of western Europe outside of the euro area should also be expected to participate in the cyclical recovery during 2002-03, and the average growth rate for these countries will probably not differ very much from that of the euro area (or the United Kingdom). Thus, on a year-over-year basis, growth for western Europe as a whole is forecast to be about 1½ percent for 2002 and about 2¾ percent for 2003.
Economic growth in central and eastern Europe slowed sharply last year, with Turkey experiencing a severe recession and most other countries feeling the negative effects of the general global slowdown. Russia also saw its growth slow last year as the favorable effects of the large real devaluation of the ruble and rise in world oil prices (of 1999-2000) began to wear off; and this process may contribute to some further slowing of growth this year. In contrast, Turkey should stage a significant economic recovery during 2002. Provided that Turkey's potentially explosive debt dynamics can be stabilized, growth should strengthen further, on a year-over-year basis, in 2003. But, it must be recognized that the provision of massive new international financial support to Turkey in early 2002 has not convincingly resolved the problem of potentially unstable debt dynamics. Without massive further official support in 2003, a debt-sustainability crisis could well emerge. At $31 billion, the level of official support for Turkey already committed by the International Monetary Fund is, by any relevant standard, well beyond that ever committed to any country. It is difficult to know whether the Fund's major shareholders would be willing to swallow the enormous embarrassment they rightly should feel in extending a further $10 billion to $20 billion of Fund support to Turkey next year to avert a possible financial crisis. Given the uncertainty in this regard, I would rate the risk of a debt-rescheduling crisis for Turkey in 2003 as a one in three or one in four possibility. Other countries in the region should generally expect to see significant increases in growth during 2002-03, reflecting normal cyclical processes, the effects of policy easings undertaken last year, and the more favorable external environment.

Asia
The Japanese economy fell into recession again last year, for the third time in a decade, and was still shrinking at year-end. Persistent economic weakness over the past decade has led to the only episode of sustained price deflation in any industrial country since the 1930s. With short-term interest rates pushed down virtually to zero, the room for traditional monetary policy to provide stimulus has been exhausted-with real short-term interest rates stuck at positive levels. Quantitative monetary easing has been implemented, first rather timidly and recently more aggressively, but its effectiveness remains to be demonstrated. With an already large fiscal deficit and a huge and growing public debt, the scope for fiscal policy to provide effective stimulus is clearly limited. Severe problems in the Japanese financial system, which began with the collapse of the bubble economy a decade ago, and have deepened in the subsequent recessions, pose a potential threat of financial instability. Thus, there is far greater reason to worry about the prospects for recovery in Japan than there is for the rest of the world economy.
Nevertheless, a cyclical recovery in Japan, probably beginning in the first half of this year, is the most likely outcome. Recall that after the recession of 1997-98 (when the Japanese economy was hit by sharp fiscal tightening, the crisis in emerging Asia, a strong appreciation of the yen, and a crisis of confidence in Japanese banks), the economy did stage a brief recovery in 1999-2000, with real GDP rising 2½ percent on a year-over-year basis in 2000. This time, the impediments to Japanese recovery are, arguably, somewhat worse than they were last time-but they are not worse by an order of magnitude. With a boost from global recovery, with the aid of a highly competitive exchange rate, and with some positive effect of quantitative monetary easing, the normal dynamics of cyclical recovery should operate in Japan. Net exports should expand. Inventory investment should shift from negative to positive. Consumer spending should begin to rebound. And, with a lag, business fixed investment may begin to pick up. All of the structural problems of the Japanese economy and financial system will weigh down on the pace of recovery, but they probably will not prevent recovery-at least not this time.
Recognizing that Japan's recovery may somewhat lag that of the United States and other countries and that the recovery in Japan may be relatively weak, the forecast for fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter real GDP growth is 1¾ percent in 2002, followed by growth of 2 percent during 2003. The corresponding forecasts for year-over-year growth are -½ percent for 2002 and 2 percent for 2003. [Note: The preliminary fourth quarter results for Japan seem quite bizarre and I assume that either the revised results will show a somewhat smaller real GDP decline in the fourth quarter or there will be some payback in the first quarter of 2002.]
Although these forecasts are at the top end of the range of forecasts for the Japanese economy (as of March 2002) and are subject to an unusual degree of uncertainty, I would emphasize that risks around these forecasts lie on the upside as well as the downside. Once a cyclical recovery gets started in Japan, real GDP growth of 3 percent or even 4 percent is within the range of reasonable outcomes.
However, in view of the precarious state of Japan's financial system, the downside risk that recovery might not occur this year and that the economy could enter a deflationary downward spiral clearly merits greater attention than the upside potential for a stronger than expected cyclical rebound. I would emphasize that even if the Japanese economy now enjoys a cyclical recovery-even a moderately vigorous recovery-the underlying weaknesses of the economy and the financial system will not be resolved. A recovery would provide a more hospitable environment in which to address these weaknesses. Unfortunately, however, the experience of the past decade does not provide confidence that this opportunity would be seized by the Japanese authorities as the occasion for vigorous efforts to clean up the mess in the financial system and press ahead with the necessary restructuring of several important sectors of the real economy. And, over time, as the public debt grows and the challenge of supporting an increasingly aged population presses closer, the task of correcting the structural weaknesses of the Japanese economy becomes more difficult. If the opportunity of the likely cyclical recovery is not used wisely and vigorously, there will surely be a rising risk of a far more serious crisis down the road.
China withstood the global economic slowdown remarkably well, with reported real GDP growth last year of 7 percent. There is, perhaps, some reason to doubt the accuracy of these officially reported figures; but, taking them at face value, it is reasonable to expect that real GDP growth for 2002 will again be about 7 percent. As was the case last year, significant fiscal policy stimulus will again help to support the Chinese economy, and the economy should also benefit from a rebound in exports as the global recovery gathers strength. For 2003, a pick up in growth to about 8 percent, in the officially reported figures, is not an unreasonable expectation.
India, too, withstood the global economic slowdown relatively well, with real GDP growth last year of about 5 percent. India remains a relatively closed economy in terms of the share of international trade in GDP; but it is not so closed that it will fail to benefit from the global recovery, despite the adverse economic effects arising from recent domestic and international disturbances.
Australia also did remarkably well in the face of the global slowdown, with the economy picking up strength in the second half of 2001 after slowing earlier on. The easing of monetary policy undoubtedly contributed to this result and helped to overcome the normally adverse effects of the weakening of global commodity prices. Now, with the economy in an upturn, monetary policy will probably need to shift toward a somewhat firmer stance. As with Australia, New Zealand's economy weathered the global economic slowdown rather well and now seems set to enjoy growth about in line with its potential.
The Korean economy was hit by the global slowdown, but expansionary domestic policies significantly helped to cushion the effect, and recent data point to a recovery that is already under way. After growth of less than 3 percent last year, acceleration to 5 to 6 percent growth this year and perhaps 6 to 7 percent growth next year appears to be a reasonable expectation.
Among the other economies of emerging Asia, those that have particularly strong links to the global economy, especially in exports of high-technology products, (i.e., Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, and Taiwan) were hit particularly hard by the global slowdown. These economies can generally expect a dramatic rebound of growth as the global economy recovers, although they may lag somewhat the general global recovery because of the likely lag in the global recovery in high-tech and telecoms. Other Asian emerging-market economies (e.g., Indonesia, the Philippines, and Thailand) generally suffered less in the global slowdown, and the rebound in growth should be commensurately less dramatic.

The Middle East and Africa
The behavior of world commodity prices, both oil and non-oil, has an important influence on both these regions. With world oil prices running above $20 per barrel, growth prospects for the oil-exporting countries in these regions are generally favorable. This is particularly true for countries where oil exports generate substantial export and fiscal revenues but are not a dominant fraction of real GDP. (Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and the UAE enjoy high incomes when oil prices are high, but this does not necessarily translate into particularly strong growth of the volume of real GDP.) Exporters of other commodities are likely to benefit as the global recovery generally begins to push up most commodity prices, although this effect is likely to be more uncertain for exporters of agricultural commodities whose prices tend to be more affected by fluctuations (often weather related) in supply than fluctuations in world demand.
Natural disasters (especially in Africa) and political turmoil (in both Africa and the Middle East) also often have an important influence on growth. In this connection, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is clearly having an important negative impact. Pakistan is feeling negative effects from the tensions with India, but is probably benefiting on balance from international support that it is receiving for its reform efforts and its constructive role in the war on terrorism. In Africa, the incidence of natural and man-made disasters appears to be running somewhat below the average of recent years-and hopefully this will continue.
On balance, I believe that we should expect the Middle East to record growth this year about in line with the average of the past decade, with the possibility of some improvement next year if levels of conflict abate. For Africa, I would anticipate growth this year that is a little bit better than average, with the prospect that growth should strengthen somewhat further next year as Africa benefits further from the general global recovery.
Table 2: Global growth prospects, 2002-03: Assessment as of March 29, 2002
(Annualized Percentage Real GDP Growth Rates Year over Year and Fourth Quarter to Fourth Quarter)
 

Year/year


Q4/Q4

Country/region
2001
2002
2003
2002
2003
Industrial countries
1
1½
3¼
3¼
3¼
   United States
1¼
2½
4
4
4
   Western Europe
1½
1½
2¾
2½
3
   Japan
-½
-½
2
1¾
2
Euro Area
1½
1½
2¾
2¾
3
   Germany
½
1
2½
2½
3
   France
2
1¾
2¾
2½
2¾
   Italy
1¾
1½
3
2¾
3
Developing countries
3½
3¾
6
4¼
6
   Asia
4½
5½
7¼
 
 
      China
7¼
7
8
 
 
      India
4½
5½
6
 
 
      Others
1
4
7
 
 
   Latin America
¼
-¾
4
 
 
      Argentina
-4½
-10 to -15
3
 
 
      Brazil
1½
1½
4
 
 
      Mexico
-¼
2
5
 
 
   Central and eastern Europe
2½
3½
5
 
 
   Middle East
2½
3
3½
 
 
   Africa
3
3½
4½
 
 
World (WEO weights)
2¼
2¾
4½
3¾
4½
Note: The WEO-based world GDP growth rates aggregate the real GDP growth of countries and regions using weights based on purchasing power parity-adjusted measures of exchange rates, which are slightly modified from those published in the International Monetary Fund's World Economic Outlook. The modifications involve the following differences with the standard WEO presentation: (i) Three Asian newly industrialized economies (Hong Kong, Korea, and Singapore) plus Taiwan are included in the Asian developing countries; (ii) Russia and most of the former Soviet Union and Turkey are included in central and eastern Europe; (iii) Israel (and Egypt) are included in the Middle East.

The Steel Crisis
Everyone agrees that the US steel industry is distressed. The disagreement is over the role of imports: to what extent is foreign steel the culprit? Before turning to this critical issue, it is worth recounting the highlights of the steel industry's difficulties. In the past four years, 29 US steel companies have entered into bankruptcy proceedings (21 since the 2000 presidential election). Table 1 lists the companies that have filed for bankruptcy and their current operating status. Many are still operating, although some have closed and a few have emerged from bankruptcy. Bethlehem Steel and LTV are the two largest companies that filed for bankruptcy. Together, these two companies represent about half of the steel-making capacity and jobs embroiled in bankruptcy filings.
In the second quarter of 2001, about 142,000 people were employed in the US steel industry, down from 163,000 in 1997 before the import surge caused by the Asian financial crisis.1 In 1974, employment in the US steel industry was 521,000-so there has already been substantial restructuring and downsizing in the industry, and enormous gains in productivity (measured in tons of steel per worker-year). Between 1997 and 2001 alone, labor productivity and total compensation rose 9 percent (from $34.78 per hour to $37.91 per hour) in the US steel industry.2
Total compensation per hour in the steel industry is high relative to plausible benchmarks. Table 2 shows that total compensation per hour in 2001 is $17 higher for a steel worker than the average worker in private industry, almost $14 more than the average manufacturing worker, $17.50 more than the average in the Midwest, and $10 more than the average union worker. Generous compensation packages are not new. Steel workers have been well paid for decades as a result of collective bargaining agreements buttressed by import controls.
Trade disputes between the
United States and its trading
partners, especially the European Union,
are numerous and rising.
Handling the steel issue in a way
that satisfies most countries
will be essential for maintaining
the momentum behind
trade liberalization.
Starting in the late 1960s and continuing through the mid-1980s, import controls enabled integrated steel firms to acquiesce in liberal wage settlements with less fear of foreign competition. Until 1968, steel wages were in line with average wages in the manufacturing sector. Between 1972 and 1981 when import controls were severe, steel wages rose 179 percent while productivity actually declined.3
The piper is now demanding payment. Generous health and pension benefits from years past, combined with mass layoffs, have now erupted in high "legacy costs" for the integrated steel industry. The legacy cost problem is compounded by the inability of bankrupt firms to pay health and pension benefits to their retired workers. The burden of legacy costs varies from firm to firm, but the United Steelworkers Association puts the aggregate figure at about $1 billion annually (on average, $9 per ton of steel produced in the United States). Legacy costs over the actuarial lifetimes of workers and retirees are said to total $13 billion.4 Several foreign countries have less generous company benefit packages, more generous government health care programs, and explicit or implicit subsidies that give their steel firms a cost advantage versus integrated mills in the United States. Most economists would say that is comparative advantage at work, but the steel industry sees unfair competition at play.
US minimills also have a cost advantage because their legacy costs are much lower than those of integrated mills. Moreover, minimills require much less capital than integrated mills. By one estimate, minimills incur $30 of fixed costs per ton of hot-rolled steel compared to $130 of fixed costs in integrated mills. This advantage is partly offset by higher variable costs for minimills, but the total costs of a ton of hot-rolled steel are said to be $350 in an integrated mill compared to $315 in a minimill. As a result of their cost advantage, the minimills' share in US steel production has doubled since 1975 and reached 45 percent in 2000.5
At the same time, there is persistent overcapacity (defined as capacity minus actual production) in the steel market-both in the United States and abroad-as a result of various market distortions. To be sure, some overcapacity (and undercapacity) must be expected from time to time as a result of business downturns. But persistent overcapacity in the steel industry is not just a cyclical phenomenon. It reflects the proclivity of most governments to slow down the closure of high-cost steel mills-using a variety of supports and subsidies. Persistent overcapacity drives down the price of steel and makes it more difficult for steel firms to make a profit over the course of the business cycle. As one result, US steel firms have turned to the government for trade restraints and various types of subsidies such as loan guarantees. These "solutions" typically prop up weak firms, perpetuate the cycle of overcapacity, and stimulate another round of calls for government aid. Michael Gambardella of J.P. Morgan estimates that the US steel industry needs to reduce capacity by 20 million short tons.6 Capacity reduction is also needed abroad to curtail the output of high-cost mills that finds its way directly or indirectly into the global market.
Persistent overcapacity in
the steel industry is not just
a cyclical phenomenon. It reflects
the proclivity of most governments
to slow down the closure of
high-cost steel mills-using a variety
of supports and subsidies.
Table 3 presents estimates of overcapacity in various countries in 1998. The most disturbing fact is that, even in a year of global prosperity, capacity exceeded production by 35 percent. The ratio of overcapacity to production in the United States and Japan was lower but still substantial. It is sometimes difficult to identify the least efficient, highest cost steel mills, but these determinations will be necessary if the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) is to agree on a plan for dealing with the industry's structural problem.
In our previous policy brief (Steel: Big Problems, Better Solutions, PB01-9), we observed that the OECD talks to reduce overcapacity in the global steel industry are unlikely to succeed, an opinion we still hold for negotiations in the present context. President Bush has little leverage and the political pain of closing steel plants is severe.7 However, chances of success at the OECD would be enhanced if the United States initiates a credible program to reduce its own steel overcapacity. The United States can also offer a carrot (discussed later): withdrawing its antidumping (AD) and countervailing duty (CVD) orders against countries that are willing to shut down their high-cost overcapacity.
The year 2002 will be critical for international trade. Following the September 11 attacks, the international community generated momentum for global trade liberalization by agreeing at Doha (November 2001) to launch a new round of negotiations. In the United States, the passage of Trade Promotion Authority (December 2001) in the House of Representatives bodes well for the new WTO round and the negotiations for the Free Trade Area of the Americas. However, trade disputes between the United States and its trading partners, especially the European Union, are numerous and rising.8 Handling the steel issue in a way that satisfies most countries will be essential for maintaining the momentum behind trade liberalization.

The Section 201 Investigation
In June 2001, in response to industry pressure, President Bush requested the US International Trade Commission (ITC) to conduct a Section 201 investigation. A Section 201 investigation seeks to determine whether imports are a "substantial cause of serious injury or threat of serious injury" to the affected industry-the steel industry in this case. Whether the imports are traded fairly is not at issue. Imports may be fairly traded but they can still cause injury-and be restrained by Section 201 remedies. However, if the imports are unfairly traded, they can also be restricted by AD and CVD penalties. In the case of steel, well before the Section 201 case was launched, the US industry had mounted 159 AD and CVD cases and has managed to get as much as 79 percent of steel imports under current AD orders.9 It seems odd for Section 201 remedies to be superimposed on AD or CVD penalties on imports of the same product from the same country. If an AD or CVD order is currently in place, it seems unlikely that the product would continue to be a substantial cause of serious injury to the US industry (the test for Section 201 relief). Despite this oddity, there appears to be some overlap between AD and CVD orders and the ITC's findings of injury.10
On October 22, 2001, the ITC decided that US manufacturers in 16 out of 33 steel product categories were injured by imports, making those products eligible for additional trade restraints. Table A1 gives the details of the injury findings.11 After determining injury, the next stage at the ITC is recommending remedies. Although the ITC can recommend trade adjustment assistance, its recommended remedies usually take the form of trade restraints, such as tariffs, quotas, and combinations of the two called tariff-rate quotas (TRQs). The products eligible for Section 201 trade restraints accounted for 27 million short tons, some 74 percent of the steel imports under investigation, and $10.7 billion of imports in 2000. On December 7, 2001, the commissioners of the ITC announced the remedy recommendations that they formally presented to President Bush on December 19, 2001. President Bush has the final say: he can implement the ITC's proposed remedies in whole or in part, he can devise totally different remedies, or he can do nothing-but the President must state his decision by March 6, 2002.12
The "Joint Remedy", which calls for
tariffs of 15-20 percent on most
products, would slash affected
imports by 20 percent. Domestic prices
and output would increase slightly,
resulting in somewhat larger
revenues for the steel industry.
About 3,500 actual and potential
jobs could be "saved" but at an
annual cost of $2 billion to the
steel users-or $584,000 per job saved.
Table 4 summarizes the remedy recommendations made by the six commissioners of the ITC. Three of the six made a joint recommendation and the other three spoke only for themselves. Overall, there is little consensus among the commissioners on the remedies. ITC Commissioners Lynn M. Bragg and Dennis M. Devaney generally agreed that high tariffs should be applied to the products that were found to be injuring the US industry, while ITC Vice Chairperson Deanna Tanner Okun generally recommended straight quotas. The other three commissioners made a joint recommendation for the most part and usually recommended straight tariff increases of 20 percent. With no ITC consensus on the remedies, President Bush will have a very free hand-politically as well as legally-to choose whatever remedies suit his purposes.
Following the ITC's remedy recommendations, the European Union released a statement condemning the ITC's decisions in harsh terms:
The measures recommended by the ITC today are totally unjustified. If this approach is accepted and implemented, it would constitute a violation of the WTO rules. The EU would immediately launch a complaint and is confident that this would lead to a rapid condemnation of the US measures. The US has already been condemned a number of times by the WTO as its anti-dumping, anti-subsidy and safeguard procedures do not conform to its international commitments. This is another case where the ITC has found injury despite the absence of any recent surge in imports. US legislation gives the US President a wide margin of manoeuvre to adopt any action which he considers 'appropriate and feasible' in response to an ITC recommendation. The EU calls on the President to choose measures, which favour market adjustment and restructuring, not market closure.13

Pascal Lamy, the trade commissioner of the European Union, stated that the European Union was willing to reduce its steel capacity and output if the United States refrained from imposing Section 201 trade restraints and took parallel measures to reduce high-cost capacity.14 His statement was made on the eve of the December 18, 2001, OECD ministerial declaration that announced a goal of reducing world steel capacity by 97.5 million metric tons over ten years. This nonbinding goal would only reduce overcapacity by a third (relative to the overcapacity estimates in table 3) and is not substantially greater than capacity reductions that might occur anyway from market forces. The tone of the meeting foreshadows political and economic retaliation if the United States largely relies on trade barriers to "solve" the steel problem. However, if the United States takes constructive steps to address the domestic roots of its steel crisis and backs away from "strong" Section 201 trade restraints, the prospects for renewed OECD negotiations that lead to meaningful cuts in world steel capacity would be
brighter.
The European Union and other countries-as well as the US steel users-stand to lose considerably if President Bush adopts any of the "strong" remedy recommendations. Table 5 calculates the gains and costs of potential Section 201 remedies.15 The "Joint Remedy", which calls for tariffs of 15 to 20 percent on most products, would slash affected imports by 20 percent. Domestic prices and output would increase slightly, resulting in somewhat larger revenues for the steel industry. About 3,500 actual and potential jobs could be "saved" but at an annual cost of $2 billion to the steel users-or $584,000 per job saved. The "Devaney/Bragg Remedy", which calls for tariffs of 35 to 40 percent, would generate the same pattern of gains and costs but with more extreme effects (reducing affected imports by more than half). The Grand Bargain (discussed at length later) would impose a much smaller cost on foreign steel exporters and domestic steel users since it entails a straight tariff of only 5 percent.
The "Devaney/Bragg Remedy",
which calls for tariffs of 35 to 40 percent,
would generate the same pattern
of gains and costs [as the Joint
Remedy] but with more extreme
effects (reducing affected imports
by more than half).
A hypothetical TRQ designed to increase the import price to $473 per short ton would "save" approximately as many jobs as the Devaney/Bragg Remedy but would generate less tariff revenue and more quota rents.16 TRQs are politically popular because the government can determine who gets to collect the quota rents-in effect the government hands out money to the holders of the quota tickets (foreign producers, established importers, or domestic producers that fabricate imported flat steel). TRQs have the political advantage of partially "compensating" favored foreign suppliers for their loss of market share by allocating valuable quota tickets to them. TRQs have the further advantage that they are hard to figure out-and therefore can be presented in different lights to different audiences. They can be advertised as "liberal" to foreign suppliers and "restrictive" to domestic producers. Despite the marketing advantages of a TRQ approach, we prefer straight tariffs at genuinely low levels. Straight tariffs maximize the revenue that the government takes in for a given amount of protection, and the impact of a tariff is highly transparent.
The figures in table 5 are roughly consistent with other careful estimates of the effects of Section 201 steel remedies. For example, Francois and Baughman (2001) use a computable general equilibrium (CGE) model to estimate that a strong tariff (20.7 percent on average) would cost the United States $450,000 annually for each job saved in the steel industry (8,900 steel jobs). Steel imports would fall by 36 percent. Moreover, they estimate that 74,500 jobs would be lost in other sectors of the US economy due to higher steel prices and lower steel consumption. On the other side of the ledger, they predict that a strong Section 201 remedy would only increase the revenues of steel producers by about $500 million annually.

The President's Choice
A discussion of the presidential choice of remedies must begin with the Administration's grand strategy in launching the Section 201 case. The Administration had four motivations, only the first of which was publicly articulated:
To set the stage for trade and other measures that would help restore the industry's financial health. This was the goal publicly articulated by the Administration. How President Bush and his advisors shape the remedies will go a long way toward determining whether this objective is met.
The second reason was to enlist support from senators and representatives from steel districts for Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), which passed the House (215-214) on December 6, 2001. Of the 30 Representatives who both voted against TPA in 1998 (when it failed to pass under the name of "fast track") and voted for TPA in 2001, 8 were from the House Steel Caucus. Presumably, President Bush promised that he would be very attentive to the needs of the steel industry to get this increased support.17 Since the TPA conference report will probably be voted up or down at the same time (early March 2002) that the president announces his Section 201 remedies, the stage is set for tight political linkage.
The president's third reason for launching the Section 201 case, back in June 2001, was to divert momentum from the congressional consideration of the Steel Revitalization Act (HR 808), which would impose strict quotas and violate WTO provisions. This bill had accumulated 226 cosponsors in the House before President Bush successfully stalled it by initiating the Section 201 investigation. However, considerable congressional support endures for one of its primary elements-providing money to cover the legacy costs of integrated mills. If not conditioned on closure of excess domestic capacity, legacy aid that enabled high-cost mills to stay in business could also violate WTO provisions.
The fourth reason for the Section 201 case was to enlist foreign cooperation in the president's initiative to close excess high-cost steel capacity in OECD countries and elsewhere (such as Russia and Brazil). This endeavor remains a work in progress, although there has been a preliminary agreement. The president's implied offer to foreign steel producers is simple: "I'll impose less Section 201 protection if you shut down your high-cost capacity." President Bush is more likely to succeed in this initiative if he can persuade US steel firms to permanently close their own excess capacity and if he can wean integrated mills from their dependence on various forms of trade protection.
While President Bush will want to honor any private commitments he made to gain congressional support for TPA, he still has room to maneuver. Members of the Steel Caucus from both sides of the aisle support legacy aid to integrated mills, and this is a card President Bush can still play. In fact, adroit Administration action could serve as the catalyst for a "Grand Bargain" with the steel industry that addresses its two primary problems-overcapacity and legacy costs.
Done right, a Grand Bargain would enable the US steel industry to get back on its feet and compete without indefinite trade protection. It would provide real assistance-not just promises-to retired and displaced steel workers. And, it would take a lot of steam out of the steel trade war that is shaping up across the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.

The Grand Bargain
US Steel and Bethlehem Steel publicly announced on December 4, 2001, that they had entered merger discussions with at least two other firms (believed to be Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel and National Steel). Presumably, one or more of these firms would buy some of the assets of LTV, which has received permission from its bankruptcy judge to idle its mills. US Steel is the largest steel producer in the United States with a domestic production capacity of about 12 million short tons. Bethlehem Steel (11.3 million short tons) and LTV (7.6 million short tons) are currently the second and third largest integrated producers of steel in the United States, but both are in bankruptcy. National Steel is the fourth largest integrated US producer (6 million short tons) and is financially viable. Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel is smaller (2.2 million short tons) and is in bankruptcy. If all these firms band together, the resulting steel conglomerate could produce 25 million to 40 million short tons, depending on how much capacity they agree to shut down.
The Grand Bargain would impose
a much smaller cost on
foreign steel exporters and
domestic steel users since it entails
a straight tariff of only 5 percent.
These firms have floated a proposal to obtain government assistance to facilitate the merger. They want the government to pick up the tab on legacy costs and to provide strong trade remedies as an outcome of the Section 201 investigation. They also want to renegotiate their labor contracts with the United Steelworkers in order to reduce labor costs. The interested parties have released a flurry of press statements staking out their positions. The Bush administration and Congress have only stated that they are willing to discuss these matters.
Any consideration of a Grand Bargain for the steel industry must begin with an understanding of the major players in the potential agreement and their core interests:
Integrated mills want legacy aid, merger approval, trade protection,and new union contracts.
Minimills want trade remedies but oppose legacy aid for integrated mills.18
United Steelworkers want legacy aid and trade protection. They are open to renegotiating compensation rates and oppose massive layoffs. Very recently-after long opposition-the United Steelworkers endorsed consolidation and asked for trade adjustment assistance.19
When other industries, such as textiles and apparel, get into trouble, they could cite the precedent that would be set by a Grand Bargain for steel. This possibility is distasteful to the Administration and some members of Congress.
President Bush wants to maintain support for TPA in the House of Representatives.20
Republican members of the Congressional Steel Caucus who voted for TPA want to stay in the good graces of the steel industry.21
Foreign countries welcome the closure of high-cost US steel mills and oppose US trade protection. Some may have concerns about legacy aid. At the same time, few foreign countries are willing to withdraw financial support and opaque protection for their own high-cost mills.22
Finally, while steel consumers are not well represented at the negotiating table, they are not enthusiastic about trade protection that would raise the cost of steel.
In light of these conflicting interests and concerns, we propose a Grand Bargain. The Grand Bargain would not completely satisfy any of the parties, but it might mark the beginning of the end to 30 years of steel disputes.
The US Government would commit up to $2.5 billion over five years to pay legacy costs for retired workers and $500 million over four years to cover the cost of wage insurance for displaced workers. In other words, the total price tag for government assistance would be capped at $3 billion. The steel firms themselves would have to pay legacy costs beyond what was covered by the government.23
The Justice Department would look favorably at any antitrust concerns raised by the proposed merger of integrated mills-on the premise that the domestic market would be more open to foreign competition as part of the Grand Bargain.
The merger parties would collectively agree to reduce capacity by about 15 million short tons. This would be accomplished by permanently shutting high-cost mills.24
Section 201 remedies would be designed to generate about $500 million annually in tariff revenue. Tariff revenue, not trade protection, would be the main goal.25 This would be accomplished by a flat tariff of about 5 percent for the next three years. In budget terms, the tariff revenue would cover about half the price tag of legacy and wage insurance costs ($1.5 billion out of $3 billion).
Firms that receive legacy assistance would withdraw their AD and CVD cases against countries that President Bush certifies to be cooperating in shutting down high-cost steel capacity and opening their markets to foreign competition. Also, the United States should repeal the Byrd Amendment, which gives the tariff revenue generated by AD duties to the petitioners.
We propose that up to $500 million
annually should be dedicated to legacy
costs over five years (total cost of
$2.5 billion). To be eligible for
this government assistance, steel
companies would have to permanently
close high-cost steel capacity.
Permanently Reduce Output and Employment: Reducing output by 15 million short tons would necessitate the layoff of about 18,000 employees. Substantial assistance should be given to these newly displaced steel workers as well as those among the 21,000 steel workers laid off since 1997 who have gotten new, but lower-paying, jobs. Our preferred solution is wage insurance.26 In our earlier policy brief, we proposed that displaced steel workers should receive 75 percent of the difference between their old salary and their new (lower) salary for one year, once they find new jobs.27 Moreover, they should receive subsidized health insurance for six months while they search for a new job. We also advocated wage insurance for workers who have been laid off in the last three years since there was a genuine import surge following the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and 1998.28 Taken together, the programs we propose would cost about $500 million over the next four years (table 6).
Legacy Costs: We propose that up to $500 million annually should be dedicated to legacy costs over five years (total cost of $2.5 billion). To be eligible for this government assistance, steel companies would have to permanently close high-cost steel capacity. They would also have to accord preferred debtor status for legacy claims not covered by government assistance-to guarantee that retired steel workers stand an excellent chance of collecting all promised benefits.29
Withdraw Unfair Trade Cases: Firms that receive legacy assistance should further agree to withdraw their existing AD and CVD orders and pending cases against any country that the president certifies has taken adequate steps to reduce its overcapacity and open its markets to foreign competition. This carrot would give President Bush negotiating leverage in the OECD talks. Also, the US government should repeal the Byrd Amendment, which requires that tariff revenue generated by AD duties be given to the parties that initiate the AD investigation. This law encourages AD actions and almost surely violates the WTO provisions. Several countries have already challenged the Byrd Amendment and a final ruling is pending in the WTO. Gracefully repealing the Amendment as part of the Grand Bargain would earn the United States negotiating points in the international community.
The European Union has indicated that it is willing to cut its steel capacity if it can get significant concessions from the United States. By eliminating high-cost capacity, reforming its unfair trade policies, and imposing only small Section 201 trade restraints, the United States would be in a position to demand significant capacity concessions from Europe. If the United States and the European Union can reach an agreement on steel, the prospects for successful OECD negotiations to reduce global overcapacity would be greatly enhanced and a persistent thorn in the side of the EU-US trade relationship would be removed.
Competitive Position of the US Steel Industry: A downsized US steel industry could operate profitably without recourse to trade protection. US steel firms are already among the most competitive in the world in terms of labor productivity (tons per worker-year), even though aggregate comparisons overlook the difference between integrated mills and minimills.30 The largest minimill firm, Nucor, produced twice as many short tons (1,383) per employee in 1999 as US Steel (647), which is the largest integrated producer.31 With consolidation, labor productivity in integrated mills would improve sharply. Productivity gains, combined with permanent mill closures and some relief from legacy costs, should enable integrated mills to operate profitably over the business cycle.
In modeling the Grand Bargain (table 5), we assume that permanently closing 15 million tons of high-cost capacity will reduce US steel output by 5 million tons. Correspondingly, we assume that efficient integrated mills and minimills will increase their output to make up the other 10 million tons. The 5 percent tariff will also encourage a small increase in domestic output. We calculate that domestic prices would rise by $12 per ton or 4 percent in the Grand Bargain. In addition (but not calculated), the US steel industry would benefit both from productivity gains following consolidation and from public relief for a portion of legacy costs.32 Imports would be little changed, falling only by about one million tons.
By contrast, tariffs of 15 to 20 percent on most products (the "Joint Remedy" in table 5) would reduce imports by 9 million tons but only increase the domestic price by $7 or 2 percent.33 Tariffs of 15-20 percent probably would not increase the domestic price enough to return integrated mills to profitability. If anything, the small domestic price increase would keep inefficient steel producers in business-in other words, delay needed plant closures. After all, it makes financial sense to continue production if the revenue per ton of steel exceeds variable costs, even when high fixed costs ensure that steel producers report large losses. The Grand Bargain, on the other hand, would raise domestic steel prices, to the same extent as a 40 percent tariff, but at substantially lower costs for steel users and with a far smaller penalty on foreign steel exporters.
Best of all, a Grand Bargain
could signal the beginning
of the end of steel trade disputes
that have plagued the United States
and the world economy
for more than 30 years.

International Negotiations: If the Bush administration is able to strike a Grand Bargain with the domestic steel industry, the United States will be in a strong position to seek parallel reforms abroad. As illustrated in table 3, the European Union, Russia, and other countries have substantial overcapacity, and some of these countries profess a willingness to discuss capacity reduction in the OECD. Substantial consolidation by the US steel industry, coupled with presidential discretion on AD and CVD orders, could jump-start the OECD talks and undercut much of the criticism that is leveled against the United States. Russia, India, China, and Brazil are not members of the OECD but they can be brought into the negotiations. Since it is intellectually and politically difficult to single out only a few countries as high-cost suppliers, a more promising tack is to obtain commitments from all participants to follow the US lead and reduce their least efficient capacity.
To summarize, each player in such a Grand Bargain would score gains while making concessions.
Integrated mills would achieve many of their objectives, but trade protection would be far less than they want and they would have to permanently shutter 15 million tons of high-cost capacity.
Minimills would have to accept some legacy aid for integrated mills but would accomplish their goal of getting integrated mills to slash their high-cost overcapacity that overhangs the market and depresses prices. They would not get their wish of a steep tariff on imported slab. However, in a downsized industry, minimills can take advantage of their high productivity to make a healthy profit.
Retired workers would receive their pensions and health insurance, and displaced workers would get wage insurance and continued health benefits. These are real dollars for real people-people who would otherwise be left with empty promises. However, steel workers would have to accept some benefit cuts and the leadership of the United Steelworkers would have to accept the reality of a smaller union.
Democrats are keen to help retired and displaced workers and President Bush needs support from Republican members of the Steel Caucus to enact TPA. A Grand Bargain would help both parties-but there is a budget cost. Under our proposal, about half of the budget cost would be offset by higher tariff revenues.34
Foreign steel producers would welcome the US industry's consolidation and the new approach to Section 201, AD and CVD remedies. However, to benefit fully, foreign producers would have to correct their own steel market distortions.
Best of all, a Grand Bargain could signal the beginning of the end of steel trade disputes that have plagued the United States and the world economy for more than 30 years.
Appendix A
The ITC's Injury Findings
Table A.1 summarizes the ITC's injury findings. Injury was found in most (6 out of 7) flat products, about half of the tubular products (2 out of 5), half of the stainless products (5 of 11), and about a third (3 of 10) of the long products. The ITC determined that Canada did not make up a substantial share of any of the flat products that were injuring US firms and that Mexico did not make up a substantial share of any of the long products where injury was found. Some Canadian and Mexican tubular and stainless products were implicated in the injury determinations.
Table A.2 shows import trends in the four broad categories of steel products. The ITC analyzed steel imports over a five-year period. The Commission also compared the first six months of 2001 versus the first six months of 2000 in making its injury determinations. Imports from non-NAFTA countries in all categories as a percentage of the overall steel market increased from 1996 to 2000 (measured in short tons); however the absolute tonnage of imports peaked at 32 million short tons in 1998. Year-to-date (YTD) steel imports-both from non-NAFTA and NAFTA countries-decreased substantially in 2001 in most categories. The general fall in YTD imports helps explain why several product categories were found not to be injuring US steel producers.
The percentage gains in imports from NAFTA countries between 1996 and 2000 were smaller than from non-NAFTA countries. Moreover, imports from NAFTA countries by and large did not exhibit such sharp declines in unit values as imports from non-NAFTA countries. These differences contributed to the exclusion of several Canadian and Mexican products from the injury determinations.
Table A.3 depicts the share of imports in US apparent steel consumption. Under a Section 201 investigation, the ITC considers both the absolute and the relative increase in imports. As often emphasized by the US steel industry, various financial crises in 1998 caused the real exchange rates of many steel exporters to plummet, thereby boosting their exports to the US market. The US steel industry is less keen to point out that the upward trend in imports has since reversed and that, in the first six months of 2001, the share of imports dropped to 23 percent-a figure lower than the "pre-crisis" levels reached in 1996 and 1997. While it seems reasonably clear that the US steel industry was harmed by imports at certain times during the last five years, it is debatable whether imports are currently a substantial cause of injury to wide segments of the US steel industry. In principle, Section 201 remedies are not supposed to compensate the domestic industry for trade injury in the past.
Drawing on these observations, several countries have criticized the ITC's injury findings and will inevitably challenge them in the WTO. A common objection is that the surge in steel imports of the late 1990s has passed, as evidenced by the YTD decline in US steel imports and the decline in the import share. The WTO requires that imports surge recently and suddenly if safeguards are to be applied. It is also said that competition from the minimills, rather than steel imports, is the major reason for the distress experienced by integrated steel firms. To defend a Section 201 finding in the WTO, imports must be a more important cause of injury than any other single cause-this is the meaning ascribed to "substantial cause". Many foreign suppliers challenge the ITC's finding that imports are the most important cause of the industry's distress.
Additionally the European Union and South Korea have criticized the way individual commissioners grouped diverse steel products together and made a single vote that applied to multiple steel products. In a few cases, imports of steel products decreased both from 1996 to 2000 and on a YTD basis but were nevertheless found to be injurious because they were grouped with steel products that experienced import growth between 1996 and 2000. This issue is especially acute for flat products, where flat slabs, which have no end uses, were grouped with end-use flat products in order to make the entire flat product group sustain a surge in imports. Commissioners would sometimes group in different ways, undermining the consistency of votes. Finally, South Korea has questioned the ITC's seemingly disparate treatment of imports from NAFTA countries.35
[ Tables 1-6, A.1-A.3 ]
References
Letter to President Bush from 24 senators. 2001. "Letter to George Bush". December 4, 2001. Inside U.S. Trade. December 7, 2001.
American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI). 2001. Selected Steel Industry Data. http://www.steel.org/stats/. December 11, 2001.
Barringer, William H. and Kenneth J. Pierce. 2000. Paying the Price for Big Steel. Washington: American Institute for International Steel.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2001. Employer Costs for Employee Compensation. http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ecec.toc.htm. December 11, 2001.
Cable News Network (CNN). 2001. "EU offers steel cuts". http://money.cnn.com/2001/12/18/international/steel/index.htm. December 18, 2001.
Cox, James. 2001. "U.S. Steel Firms Weigh Merger". USA Today December 5, 2001. http://www.usatoday.com/money/general/2001/12/04/steel.htm. December 11, 2001.
European Union. 2001. "EU Blasts ITC Steel Decision". Press Release. December 7, 2001.
Francois, Joseph F. and Laura Baughman. 2001. Estimated Economic Effects of Proposed Import Relief Remedies for Steel. http://www.citac-trade.org/remedy/remedy.pdf. December 20, 2001.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde and Ben Goodrich. 2001. Steel: Big Problems, Better Solutions. International Economics Policy Brief 01-09. Washington: Institute for International Economics. July.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde and Kimberly Ann Elliott. 1994. Measuring the Costs of Protectionism in the United States. Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Inside U.S. Trade. 2001a. "Lamy Blasts U.S. Steel Safeguard Investigation, Threatens WTO Case." December 14. p.10.
Inside U.S. Trade. 2001b. "Baucus Sees Fast-track Vote Pushed to 2002, Links Vote to Steel TAA." December 21, p. 3.
International Iron and Steel Institute (IISI). 2001. World Steel in Figures Online. http://www.worldsteel.org/trends_indicators/contents.html. December 11, 2001.
International Trade Administration. 2000. Global Steel Trade. http://www.ita.doc.gov/media/steelreport726.html. December 11, 2001.
International Trade Commission (ITC). 2001a. ITC Details Determinations Concerning Impact of Imports of Steel on U.S. Industry. http://www.usitc.gov/er/nl2001/ER1023Y1.PDF. December 11, 2001
International Trade Commission (ITC). 2001b. Certain Steel Products Trade Data. http://dataweb.usitc.gov/scripts/steel.asp. December 11, 2001.
International Trade Commission (ITC). 2001c. Summary of Commission Remedy Recommendations. http://www.usitc.gov/er/nl2001/er1207y1c1.pdf. December 11, 2001.
International Trade Reporter. 2001. "Zoellick Calls Steel Industry Requests For 'Legacy Costs' Assistance Too 'Rich'." International Trade Reporter 18, no. 49. December 13.
Kletzer, Lori G. and Robert E. Litan. 2001. A Prescription to Relieve Worker Anxiety. International Economics Policy Brief 01-02. Washington: Institute for International Economics and The Brookings Institution. February.
Kletzer, Lori G. 2001. Workers Displaced from Blast Furnaces and Iron & Steel Foundries, 1979-99. Private correspondence. Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Leibowitz, Lewis E. 2001. Safety Valve or Flash Point? The Worsening Conflict between U.S. Trade Laws and WTO Rules. CATO Institute Center for Trade Policy Studies Brief No.17. November 6, 2001.
Messer, Mary, D.J. Na, and Chris Cassise. 2001. Staff Report to the Commission on Investigation No. TA-201-73. Washington: United States International Trade Commission.
United Steelworkers Association of America (USWA). 2001a. Health Care Benefits for Steel Industry Retirees: Domestic Costs vs. Foreign Subsidies. http://www.uswa.org/sra/LegacyCosts.pdf. November 20, 2001.
United Steelworkers Association of America (USWA). 2001b. Steel Companies Filing for Bankruptcy, 1997-2001. http://www.uswa.org/sra/Bankruptcies2001_12-10-01.pdf. December 11, 2001.
United Steelworkers Association of America (USWA). 2001c. USWA Local Leaders Say Federal Action on Legacy Costs Would Clear Path for Consolidation Talks. http://www.uswa.org/press/bisc121201pr.html. December 14, 2001.
Notes:
1. AISI (2001).
2. AISI (2001).
3. Barringer and Pierce (2000, 36).
4. USWA (2001a).
5. Barringer and Pierce (2000), chapter 6.
6. See Cox (2001). A capacity reduction of 20 million short tons would bring the industry capacity down to about 100 million short tons. To be sure, this figure is not a magic number and the composition of the domestic industry is more important to competitiveness than is the aggregate output.
7. See Hufbauer and Goodrich (2001). Our basic argument is that the domestic political pain of reducing overcapacity-in sugar, dairy, shipbuilding, or steel-is simply too great for most democratically elected governments to succeed at negotiating binding international accords. Moreover, the intellectual problem of defining "overcapacity" is severe-should the definition be based on total costs, average variable costs, some definition of marginal costs, or something else?
8. See Leibowitz (2001).
9. Letter to President Bush from 24 senators (2001).
10. See appendix A. At the petitioners' urging, the ITC made broad injury findings by grouping seemingly different products together and applying a single vote to the entire group. For example, imports of hot-rolled flat products declined from 1996 to 2000 as a result of AD duties imposed in 1999. But, hot-rolled flat products were grouped together with other flat products (some of which experienced moderate import surges) and imports were deemed to have surged in the "flat product group".
11. For more analysis of the injury findings, see appendix A.
12. The normal date would be February 17, 2002, but by requesting additional information from the ITC, the president can delay his decision until March 6, 2002.
13. EU (2001). In a subsequent statement, Pascal Lamy characterized the US steel policy as a one best summarized as "stop me before I kill again" since the ITC recommended Section 201 remedies on the eve of another round of OECD negotiations (Inside U.S. Trade 2001a).
14. See CNN (2001). Lamy said that the European Union was prepared to slash production of crude steel by 13 million metric tons, and finished steel by 16 million metric tons during the period 1998-2002. It is not clear how much production would be cut from the level in 2000. Lamy's statement declared a willingness to cut capacity, but did not indicate where capacity might be cut.
15. The model is the same as that used in Hufbauer and Goodrich (2001) and Hufbauer and Elliot (1994).
16. The Joint Remedy and the Devaney/Bragg effects are calculated using disaggregated data at the product level. By comparison, the hypothetical tariff-rate quota and Grand Bargain effects are calculated using aggregate industry data. The high number of jobs saved under the TRQ, relative to Devaney/Bragg, partly reflects different parameter values used in the two approaches.
17. Of the 23 Republicans who did not vote for TPA in 2001, 6 were members of the House Steel Caucus.The House Steel Caucus has 59 Democrats and 45 Republicans. Of these, 4 Democrats and 39 Republicans voted for TPA.
18. Minimills would like high tariffs on imported slab, so as to hobble emerging competitors ("rollermills") that process slab into finished steel products.
19. USWA (2001c).
20. Also, Senator Max Baucus, chair of the Senate Finance Committee, strongly suggested that if President Bush were to impose strong Section 201 steel remedies, it would be easier to bring TPA to a vote in the Senate. (Inside U.S. Trade 2001b.)
21. The same can be said of the four "wayward" Democrat CSC members who voted in favor of TPA.
22. While all parties rhetorically support the concept of reducing global steel overcapacity, the preliminary OECD agreement did not include a concrete plan of action that commits individual countries to reduce their own overcapacity.
23. Robert Zoellick, the US Trade Representative, stated that the integrated mills' request of $1 billion annually was "a little rich". See International Trade Reporter (2001).
24. The industry itself should decide which mills (or parts of mills) should be permanently closed. However, the US government should insist on certification from an independent audit team that the agreed tonnage has been permanently closed.
25. This recommendation sharply breaks from past practice. Section 201 remedies are customarily designed with an eye toward protection rather than tariff revenue. But experience teaches that protection often freezes an industry in its uncompetitive ways, whereas tariff revenue can potentially be used for adjustment and downsizing.
26. See Kletzer and Litan (2001).
27. See Hufbauer and Goodrich (2001). The wage insurance rate would drop to 50 percent of the salary gap in the second year and 25 percent in the third year.
28. This import surge has disappeared in the past two years, which is one reason why we are skeptical of strong Section 201 remedies.
29. Existing creditors of steel firms would need to agree that legacy claims would have preferred debtor status.
30. See Hufbauer and Goodrich (2001, 2).
31. Barringer and Pierce (2000), chapter 6.
32. These calculations do not take into account the effect of terminating AD and CVD cases or the companion effect of reducing global overcapacity.
33. The Joint Remedy contemplates a TRQ with a high in-quota allowance on imported slab. This TRQ would have little protective effect to the dismay of minimill petititoners who want to restrict imported slab as a means of hobbling competition from fast-growing rollermills.
34. Given present budget conventions, higher revenues from a Section 201 tariff on steel imports probably cannot be "scored" against an appropriated government contribution to legacy costs. However, Administration and congressional advocates can work out the arithmetic, even if budget bean counters cannot perform the calculations.
35. See Leibowitz (2001) for a summary of foreign challenges to Section 201 procedures.

Gary Clyde Hufbauer, Reginald Jones Senior Fellow, is coauthor of World Capital Markets: Challenge to the G-10 (2001) and Economic Sanctions Reconsidered, 3rd edition (forthcoming), and coeditor of The Ex-Im Bank in the 21st Century: A New Approach? (2001). Jeffrey J. Schott, senior fellow, is the author of Prospects for Free Trade in the Americas (2001) and coauthor of Economic Sanctions Reconsidered, 3rd edition (forthcoming). Barbara Oegg is a research assistant at the Institute for International Economics.© Institute for International Economics. All rights reserved.
IntroductionFollowing the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon, President Bush prepared the country for a "war on terrorism". As outlined in his speech before the joint session of Congress on September 20, the war on terrorism will be fought on many fronts: diplomatic, intelligence, covert action, economic sanctions, law enforcement as well as military. Diplomacy, intelligence, covert action, and economic sanctions have historically served as auxiliary measures in wartime. Economic sanctions, in particular, have routinely foreshadowed or accompanied broader war efforts.What sets the campaign against international terrorism apart from other wars is the emphasis on economic tools. Several senior US officials, including Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, have suggested that economic and financial efforts will be as important in winning the war on terrorism as the military campaign. Determined to bring US economic as well as military power to bear in the fight against terrorism, the Bush administration has deployed a variety of economic tools such as preferential trade measures, the removal of existing sanctions coupled with loans to reward allies, and new sanctions to intimidate adversaries. In this war, sanctions policy is being used both as a stick and a carrot, which is a new and welcome twist.That said, the history of economic sanctions in the past century reveals very few instances where economic weapons achieved major foreign policy goals.1 Striking terror is the raison d'être of terrorist groups. To eliminate these groups, or persuade them to abandon their objective, would rank as a major policy triumph. The history of economic sanctions amply demonstrates that only military force and covert action can play a decisive role in a battle of this magnitude. At best, economic sanctions can play only a supporting role with respect to terrorist groups.In this war [on terrorism], sanctions policy is being used both as a stick and a carrot, which is a new and welcome twist.While economic sanctions alone may not dissuade terrorist groups, they may cause states that harbor and support terrorist groups to reconsider the extent of their support. The Libyan extradition of the two Pan Am suspects illustrates an important shift in state policy induced in part by economic sanctions.One of the first measures implemented by President Bush in the war on terrorism was aimed at disrupting terrorist finances. On September 23, he issued an executive order freezing the assets of named terrorists, terrorist groups, and terrorist fundraising organizations in an effort to weaken the financial lifeline of the al Qaeda network.2 To coordinate the activities of the various US agencies on the financial front, the administration created the Foreign Terrorist Asset Tracking Center in the Treasury Department.These measures carry on the tradition of past US counterterrorism efforts. Indeed, US counterterrorism policy, dating back to the early 1970s, has been heavily sanctions oriented. US counterterrorism sanctions policy rests on two primary legislative tools-the designation of state sponsors of terrorism and Foreign Terrorist Organizations (FTOs), and the presidential determination of Specially Designated Terrorists (SDTs).
State SponsorsIn the 1970s and 1980s, US counterterrorism policy primarily focused on state sponsorship of international terrorism. State sponsors of terrorism are countries designated by the Secretary of State under Section 6 (j) of the Export Administration Act of 1979 as countries that have "repeatedly provided state support for acts of international terrorism." Currently the list of state sponsors includes seven countries: Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan, and Syria. Naming a country on the terrorism list triggers a series of economic sanctions under different US laws. These sanctions include:restrictions on export licenses (or a general ban) for dual-use items or critical technology (under the Export Administration Act of 1979) ban on sales or licenses for items on the US Munitions Control List (under the Arms Export Control Act) ban on US foreign assistance including Export-Import Bank credits and guarantees (under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961) authorization for the president to restrict or ban imports of goods and services from designated terrorist countries (under the International Security and Development Cooperation Act of 1985) prohibition of financial transactions by US persons with the governments of designated terrorist countries (under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996) requirement that US representatives at international financial institutions vote against loans or other financial assistance to that country (under the International Financial Institutions Act of 1977) ineligibility for the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP, under the Trade Act of 1974)Although naming a country as a state sponsor does not automatically trigger a total economic embargo, with the exception of Syria, all countries currently designated as state sponsors-Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, Sudan, and North Korea-are also subject to comprehensive trade and financial sanctions imposed by the executive branch under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA). In some of these cases-particularly Cuba and North Korea-US sanctions policy is less determined by concerns over terrorism than broad foreign policy conflicts.The [Bush] administration has offered the "carrot" of lifting select or all existing economic sanctions as an incentive for countries to join the war on terrorism. In a few instances, the administration has quelled the looming imposition of new sanctions, or has provided economic assistance to allies-of-convenience.Case StudiesIran. Iran was added to the list of state sponsors of terrorism in 1984 in response to the alleged Iranian involvement in the bombing of the US Marine base in Lebanon. Export controls imposed following Iran's initial designation as state sponsor were tightened twice. In 1987, under pressure from Congress, President Reagan invoked Section 505 of the International Security and Development Act and banned all imports from Iran and prohibited exports of several potentially militarily useful goods. In 1992, Congress passed the Iran-Iraq Arms Non-Proliferation Act prohibiting the export of defense items, nuclear material, and certain dual-use goods under the Export Administration Act.Concerned about nuclear proliferation and Iran's continued support for terrorist groups, President Clinton issued a series of executive orders beginning in 1995. These eventually banned all US trade, investment, and financial dealings with Iran. In addition, US residents and companies are barred from financing, supervising, and managing oil development projects in Iran under the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (which was extended for 5 years in August 2001).In 1999 and 2000, the Clinton administration lifted selected sanctions on Iran to signal support for reforms by moderate President Mohammad Khatami. In April 1999, the administration modified the trade ban to allow for the sale of food and medicine on a case-by-case basis, and a year later the administration lifted the ban on certain nonoil imports such as carpets, caviar, pistachios, and dried fruit. However, according to the State Department's annual report on "Patterns of Global Terrorism 2000" (hereafter cited as Patterns 2000), Iran remained the "most active" state sponsor of international terrorism in 2000. In other words, two decades of US economic sanctions failed to reduce Iran's willingness to sponsor terrorism.Iraq. Iraq was first placed on the terrorism list in December 1979 and removed in 1982. After Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990, the State Department again placed Iraq on the terrorism list. Meanwhile, Iraq has been subject to the most comprehensive US and UN trade and financial sanctions regime mounted since the Second World War. US and UN sanctions probably curbed Iraq's ability to instigate very high-tech terror, such as suitcase nuclear weapons and sophisticated biological weapons, by reducing resources available to Saddam Hussein. But Patterns 2000 reports that Iraq continues to plan and sponsor international terrorism focused on Iraqi dissident groups abroad and continues to offer safe haven to various expatriate terrorist groups such as the Palestine Liberation Front and the Abu Nidal organization. Furthermore, post-September 11 investigations revealed Iraqi contacts with one of the lead hijackers (Mohammed Atta) and possible links between Iraq and anthrax. These offenses, together with US-Iraq differences over Iraq's regional ambitions and its record of noncompliance with UN weapons inspectors, will probably keep Iraq on the terrorism list for the foreseeable future.Libya. Libya has a long history of sponsoring international terrorism and was placed on the first terrorism list in December 1979. Export controls were followed by a ban on crude oil imports from Libya, restrictions on exports of sophisticated oil and gas equipment and technology, and later a ban on imports of refined oil products. In response to Libyan involvement in the terrorist attacks on airports in Rome and Vienna, President Reagan invoked IEEPA to implement comprehensive trade and financial controls in 1986. The Reagan administration barred most exports and imports of goods, services, and technology, prohibited all loans or credits to the Libyan government, and froze Libyan government assets in US banks.The history of economic sanctions amply demonstrates that only military force and covert action can play a decisive role in a battle of this magnitude. At best, economic sanctions can play only a supporting role.Following the bombings of Pan Am flight 103 in December 1988 and France UTA flight 772 in September 1989, US policy toward Libya was dominated by efforts to extradite two Libyan intelligence agents accused of the Pan Am bombing. Libyan intransigence in the face of extradition demands led to greater multilateral cooperation. In 1992, the UN Security Council imposed an arms embargo on Libya and prohibited all travel to and from Libya. A year later, the United Nations banned the sale of petroleum equipment to Libya and froze all nonpetroleum-related Libyan government assets abroad.According to Patterns 2000, Libyan terrorism was sharply reduced after the imposition of UN sanctions. Pressure from the international community was credited as a deterrent to Libyan sponsorship. Mandatory UN sanctions, the first to be imposed in response to government involvement in an act of terrorism, ultimately secured the extradition of the two Libyan Pan Am suspects in April 1999. This led to the suspension of UN sanctions. The suspects were subsequently tried and one was convicted and imprisoned for life, but conviction and punishment were not conditions for lifting UN sanctions.In continued efforts to improve its international standing, Libya not only expelled the radical Palestinian terrorist group Abu Nidal but also compensated the victims of the France UTA flight. Libya also accepted "general responsibility" for the 1984 shooting of a policewoman outside the Libyan embassy in London and agreed to compensate her family. While Libya has made progress toward meeting US demands, the Bush administration insists that US unilateral sanctions will remain in place until Libya accepts responsibility for the Pan Am bombing, compensates the victims, and renounces all support for terrorism.The success of UN sanctions in the case of Libya suggests that economic sanctions, if imposed multilaterally, can achieve clearly defined and relatively modest policy goals, illustrated by the extradition of the two mid-level Pan Am suspects.Syria. Like Libya, Syria has been on the terrorism list since its inception in December 1979. Although subject to strict export controls and other economic restrictions due to its position on the terrorism list, most US trade and investment with Syria is allowed. Despite its designation as a state sponsor, Syria enjoys comparatively normal relations with the United States. According to State Department sources, there is no evidence of direct Syrian involvement in or support for terrorist actions since 1986. However, Syria continues to support and provide safe haven to Hezbollah and Hamas, among other Palestinian terrorist groups.Despite several decades of economic sanctions, the majority of designated state sponsors [of terrorism] have continued to shelter and harbor international terrorists and terrorist groups in their territories.Sudan. According to Patterns 2000, Sudan signaled its willingness to cooperate with international counterterrorism efforts shortly after the State Department added Sudan to the list of state sponsors in August 1993. In 1994, Sudan extradited "Carlos the Jackal" to France. Under US pressure, Sudan also expelled Osama bin Laden in 1996. Nevertheless, the United States imposed comprehensive sanctions on Sudan because of the persecution of Christians in southern Sudan. Preempting congressional action, President Clinton issued Executive Order 13067 in November 1997, blocking all property of the Sudanese government in the United States, imposing a trade embargo, and prohibiting any transactions with Sudan.3By the end of 2000, Sudan had signed all 12 international conventions for combating terrorism and taken several other positive steps. However, Sudan has yet to comply with three UN Security Council Resolutions passed in 1996. These resolutions demand the extradition of three suspects in the assassination attempt on Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak in 1995 and ask that Sudan end all support to terrorists. The resolutions impose limited travel and diplomatic sanctions, and (in theory only) restrict international flights in and out of Sudan.Cuba. Cuba, which has been under comprehensive US sanctions since 1960, was added to the list of state sponsors in 1982, primarily because of its support for the M-19 guerrilla organization in Colombia. Although the Castro regime was very active in providing arms and training to leftist terrorist organizations during the Cold War, Cuba is no longer active in supporting armed struggles around the world. Cuba, however, remains on the terrorist list because it continues to provide safe haven to individual terrorists and maintains ties to Latin American insurgents.North Korea. Similar to Cuba, North Korea has been subject to comprehensive US sanctions for several decades (indeed since the Korean War). North Korea was added to the list of countries sponsoring terrorism because of its implication in the bombing of a South Korean airline in November 1987. Although North Korea has on several occasions publicly condemned all forms of terrorism, it remains on the state sponsor list because it continues to provide refuge to international terrorists.Afghanistan. The State Department characterized Afghanistan in 1999 as "the primary safe haven for terrorists". But the country was never designated as a state sponsor of terrorism because of the State Department's concern that this determination would constitute a de facto recognition of the Taliban as the legitimate government of Afghanistan. However, the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 created a new designation category-noncooperation. Section 330 prohibits sale of arms to any country the president determines and certifies is not cooperating fully with US antiterrorism efforts. In May 1997, the Clinton administration certified Afghanistan for the first time as not cooperating with US antiterrorism efforts. Apart from the seven state sponsors, Afghanistan is the only country currently certified as not fully cooperating with US antiterrorism efforts.4Because Islamic fundamentalist terrorists continued to train and operate out of Afghanistan, and more specifically because the Taliban continued to harbor Osama bin Laden and his terrorist networks that were believed to be responsible for bombing two US embassies in Africa, the Clinton administration imposed comprehensive sanctions on the Taliban in 1999. The executive order banned all trade with the areas in Afghanistan under Taliban control, froze Taliban assets in the United States, and prohibited financial contributions to the Taliban by US persons.To say that economic sanctions will play an auxiliary role to intelligence, covert action, and military strikes is not to denigrate their importance. In the war against terrorism, asset freezes and other sanctions will pinch. But we cannot count on economic sanctions to bring bin Laden and al Qaeda to heel.The United Nations supported US efforts, imposed a flight ban, and froze overseas Taliban assets. A year later, the United Nations also imposed an arms embargo and ordered the freeze of the assets of bin Laden and his associates.Somalia. Although Somalia is not listed as a state sponsor of terrorism, the Bush administration is concerned about terrorist centers in Somalia and regards the country as a likely alternative safe haven for Osama bin Laden and his associates-if they leave Afghanistan. Somalia has been without a central government since its last president Mohamed Siad Barre fled the country in 1991 and interfactional fighting then led to national disintegration. The United Nations intervened in 1992 and imposed a weakly enforced arms embargo. The United States closed its embassy and ended its participation in the UN mission in Somalia in 1994. According to US intelligence reports Somalia has served as a regional base for operations of al Qaeda since 1993, when Osama bin Laden first provided assistance to warlord Mohamed Aideed. (Aideed's forces killed 18 US soldiers serving in a UN peacekeeping mission.) Al Qaeda also maintains close ties with the radical Somali Islamic group al-Itahaad.
Summary of State SponsorsThis brief review of US policy toward state sponsors of terrorism suggests that unilateral US sanctions, by themselves, have not deterred countries from engaging in terrorist activities. Despite several decades of economic sanctions, the majority of designated state sponsors have continued to shelter and harbor international terrorists and terrorist groups in their territories. According to the annual reports, sanctions contributed to the negotiated compromise that led to the extradition and subsequent trial of the suspects in the bombing of the Pan Am flight. Multilateral economic sanctions also succeeded in convincing Sudan to cooperate with US terrorism efforts. These are the only two terrorism-related cases where the United States succeeded in garnering multilateral support for economic sanctions.Modest success in these two cases corresponds with general trends we have observed. In a survey of about 180 cases of economic sanctions imposed after the Second World War, we found that the success rate of US unilateral sanctions has sharply declined over the last several decades. Between 1960 and 1970 the success rate of unilateral US sanctions dropped from 62 percent to a mere 17 percent. Low success rates for unilateral sanctions continued in the 1980s and 1990s. Meanwhile, the success rate of all US sanctions cases where the United States was part of a sanctions coalition remained in the 25 percent range over the period from the 1970s to 1990s.The US approach in dealing with state sponsors has differed from the approach favored by its allies. While the European Union believes in "constructive engagement" with countries such as Iran, the United States is inclined to isolate and punish these countries. Frustrated by the lack of international cooperation, the US Congress sought to extend the reach of unilateral US measures by imposing secondary sanctions on firms located in third countries. In 1996, Congress passed the Helms-Burton Act targeting foreign companies that invest in Cuba, and a few months later, Congress passed the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act (ILSA) seeking to prevent European companies from investing in the oil sector in Iran and Libya. The extraterritorial scope of these measures irritated key US allies, but Presidents Clinton and Bush have waived key provisions of each bill to avoid imposing sanctions against allied industrial nations. As a result, these US laws only block activities by US firms.Other secondary measures imposed in the 1990s include an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 that prohibits selected US government foreign assistance to any country that provides economic assistance or lethal military assistance to the designated terrorist countries, and the Iran Non-Proliferation Act of 2000, which allows for the imposition of economic sanctions to entities in third countries that contribute to Iranian weapons proliferation. The threat of secondary sanctions in these instances did not lead to greater international cooperation with US counterterrorism policies.Historically, most major acts of terrorism against American citizens and other targets abroad were supported and, in some cases, instigated by state sponsors. Accordingly, US policy in the 1970s and 1980s focused on state sponsors and the groups they support. However, in the last decade, as the State Department has indicated in its annual reports, signs point to declining state sponsorship of terrorist activities and a rising threat posed by independent terrorist networks such as Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda network. In response to these new threats, US counterterrorism initiatives were expanded to incorporate restrictions on foreign terrorist groups and individuals.
Foreign Terrorist Organizations and Specially Designated TerroristsIn 1995, President Clinton issued an executive order that prohibits transfers of funds, goods, and services to any individual or organization that threatens to disrupt the Middle East peace process.5 The order also blocked all property and interests in property of persons designated by the Secretary of Treasury, in coordination with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General, as opposing the Middle East peace process ("Specially Designated Terrorist"). The "Specially Designated Terrorist" (SDT) label, and the associated freeze of US-held assets, also included persons and entities designated to "be owned or controlled by, or to act for or on behalf of" any Specially Designated Terrorist.The central legislative initiative with respect to US counterterrorism policy in the 1990s is the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996. This Act provides for the designation of "Foreign Terrorist Organizations" (FTOs) by the Secretary of State, a designation equivalent to the state sponsor designation. The Act also included provisions aimed at disrupting financial flows to FTOs: Section 303 makes it a crime for US residents to knowingly provide material support or resources to a designated FTO. In addition, financial institutions are required to block funds in "which a foreign terrorist organization, or its agent, has an interest"6 and report the existence of these funds to the Treasury. The Treasury may require US financial institutions to freeze assets of a designated FTO.The provision of the Act that received great publicity was the so-called "Farrakhan Amendment". In its broadest interpretation, the Amendment prohibits financial transactions by US persons with the governments of designated terrorist countries. The administration, in issuing the regulations, chose to interpret the provision more narrowly-restricting donations or transactions when a US person has reason to believe it will be used to support terrorist acts in the United States. The 1990s saw the emergence of Osama bin Laden and the al Qaeda network on the international scene. After the United States successfully pressured Sudan into expelling Osama bin Laden in 1996, bin Laden found refuge in Afghanistan. From there, he is believed to have masterminded the bombing of US embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam in 1998, and the suicide attack on the USS Cole in October 2000. In response to the embassy attacks, President Clinton issued Executive Order 13099 on 21 August 1998 determining that Osama bin Laden and his al Qaeda network constitute a threat to the Middle East peace process, thereby adding them to the list of SDTs and FTOs. The order banned US financial transactions with bin Laden's organization and allowed US law enforcement to freeze any bin Laden assets in the United States that can be identified. However, prior to September 11, the US Treasury was unable to link any assets in the United States firmly to bin Laden or his terrorist network.Despite the substantial experience of the US Treasury Department Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) in administering financial sanctions, its pre-September 11 efforts to stop the money flow to terrorist organizations were not particularly successful. The 2000 Treasury Department annual report on terrorist assets reveals that only $301,146 in assets of designated Foreign Terrorist Organizations or Specially Designated Terrorists in the United States were frozen. A major challenge for an asset freeze program is to identify funds belonging to the individuals, governments, and organizations targeted. Although the means of tracking financial assets have greatly improved, so have the means of deception. Even when individual funds can be identified, secrecy and speed are critical in preventing targets from moving assets to numbered accounts in offshore banking centers. Unfortunately, secrecy and speed are not easily reconciled with the need to coordinate efforts with allies or within the UN Security Council.7 The importance of improved cooperation is illustrated by recent press reports that UN, US, and EU lists of targeted individuals and organizations associated with the Taliban and Osama bin Laden do not match up.The US approach in dealing with state sponsors has differed from the approach favored by its allies. While the European Union believes in "constructive engagement" with countries such as Iran, the United States is inclined to isolate and punish these countries.Post-September 11 InitiativesFollowing the attack on September 11, law enforcement focused sharply on the financial trails of terrorist networks. Declaring a national emergency with respect to acts of terrorism, President Bush used his power under the IEEPA on 23 September 2001 to broaden existing authorities in several ways. First, the new executive order expanded the coverage of past executive orders from terrorism in the Middle East to global terrorism. Second, it expanded the class of targeted groups to include all those who are "associated with" designated terrorist groups. Third, it established the ability to block US assets, and deny access to US markets, of foreign banks that refuse to freeze terrorist assets.Broadening the scope of current laws and regulations with respect to terrorist assets is crucial. Prior laws and regulations gave the government less authority to seize assets of terrorists than the assets of drug lords. The "Specially Designated Narcotics Traffickers" (SDNT) program administered by OFAC has been modestly successful precisely because its targets included those that provide material, technological, or financial assistance to designated narcotics traffickers. The White House reported on October 11 that about $40 million of assets linked to Taliban and al Qaeda have been frozen worldwide since September 11. Some press reports suggested that frozen terrorist assets are closer to $100 million. However, it is not clear if these estimates include assets belonging only to the al Qaeda network or to other terrorist groups as well. By 1999, the United States had already frozen a reported $254 million of Taliban assets. These numbers suggest that inclusion of entities "associated with" terrorist groups may prove to be important for disrupting access to funding.While no data is available on the amount of money frozen under OFAC's "Specially Designated Narcotics Traffickers" program, OFAC reports emphasize that since the inception of the program in 1995 more than 10 drug kingpins and about 568 other SDNTs have been identified. OFAC also reports that about 60 companies linked to drug traffickers have been liquidated or are in the process of liquidation. These companies had a combined net worth of about $45 million and combined annual income of about $230 million8-tiny amounts considering that estimates place the retail value of illicit drug trade between $300 billion and $500 billion annually.9 Interpreting the seizure figures very generously, in the case of narcotics, asset freezes have disrupted less than 1 percent of the annual money flow. If the antiterrorist program is 10 times as successful, and disrupts 10 percent of terrorist funding, that unfortunately would leave 90 percent of terrorist money free to spread destruction and disease.Another difficulty in freezing terrorist assets is that these groups may transfer money outside the banking system either in cash or through street-corner money exchange systems. Further, unlike drug traffickers who control legitimate businesses to launder illegal profits, in the case of terrorism money, legitimate businesses and charities may divert a part of their funds to support terrorist groups. Solid evidence that money is being diverted for terrorist activities is hard to come by. Also, the amounts involved in terrorist activities are much smaller than in drug trafficking and are therefore less likely to attract attention.Following September 11, the administration worked closely with Congress on broad new antiterrorism legislation. The "USA Patriot Act" passed by Congress at the end of October 2001 strengthens the criminal laws against terrorism and expands the ability of US law enforcement and intelligence agencies to track and detain suspected terrorists. The act also includes several measures to disrupt money laundering and other methods of terrorist financing. The bill requires that foreign banks with corresponding accounts in US banks designate a point person to receive subpoenas related to these accounts. Furthermore, US banks are barred from doing business with banks that have no physical facility or operate outside the regulated banking system. The Treasury also has the authority to require banks to scrutinize deposits from residents of nations that do not cooperate with US officials. The bill also includes a provision that allows the Treasury to impose sanctions on banks that refuse to provide information to law enforcement agencies.The threat of US sanctions sends an important message about the level of US commitment to foreign banks. Nevertheless, previous efforts to extend the force of US sanctions to third countries have always been contentious. Coordination of efforts within the G-7 and the United Nations Security Council may ultimately prove to be more successful in securing international cooperation than the threat of secondary economic sanctions.Indeed, dramatically improved international cooperation with US efforts in the wake of September 11 may have made the biggest difference in terms of tracking down terrorist assets so far. According to an October 11 press release by the Treasury Department, 102 countries have committed themselves to joining the effort to disrupt terrorist assets, and 62 countries have already put blocking orders into effect. Terrorist assets frozen abroad include10 : Germany: $3.7 million  Bahamas: $20 million  The Netherlands: $550,000  United Kingdom: $88 million (including Taliban assets frozen prior to September 11)Despite these early successes, formidable challenges remain. For one, terrorist activities are in most cases low-budget operations. Identifying and tracking accounts (especially small amounts) require a tremendous amount of intelligence and coordination. The new Foreign Terrorist Asset Tracking Center, which for the first time coordinates all intelligence sources and efforts with cooperating governments, together with the provisions of the US Patriot Act and increased international cooperation, may greatly improve the US ability to track terrorist finances and locate targeted accounts. To further increase the effectiveness of financial sanctions, other measures that might be considered include: (1) placing covert agents in banks in countries that do not cooperate with US law enforcement and reporting requirements; (2) more aggressive tracking of even modest money transfers ($20,000 or less) to immigrants living in the United States; and (3) the provision of large bounties to reward disclosure of terrorist funds. In a Heritage Foundation Backgrounder, Brett Schaefer has argued that America's allies, as well as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, should stop providing grants and loans to all seven countries identified by the US State Department as sponsors of terror (Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan, and Syria). If the US government could accomplish this objective in a cooperative rather than confrontational manner with its allies, and in a way that allowed some of the state sponsors to "switch sides" in the war against terror, that would be a notable achievement. However, it would set the coalition back if the US government attempted to browbeat its allies and the international financial institutions into cutting off all their grants and loans in short order.
CarrotsThe administration has offered the "carrot" of lifting select or all existing economic sanctions as an incentive for countries to join the war on terrorism. In a few instances, the administration has quelled the looming imposition of new sanctions, or has provided economic assistance to allies-of-convenience. The package of economic benefits for cooperating with the United States is considerable for some countries.Pakistan:The administration waived sanctions imposed on Pakistan after the country conducted nuclear tests in 1998, as well as other restrictions dating back to the early 1990s. We estimated that the average annual costs of US sanctions to Pakistan were about $405 million (or 1 percent of Pakistan's 1990 GDP). The Bush administration released an initial $50 million in emergency aid to Pakistan and plans to ask Congress for $600 million in new economic as- sistance for Pakistan. The United States has rescheduled payments for $379 million of Pakistan's $34.6 billion foreign debt. United States and the European Union are considering a reduction and/or suspension of tariff duties and quota restrictions on textiles and apparel products from Pakistan. The Pakistani textile industry accounts for 60 percent of its industrial workforce.India:While most sanctions imposed in response to India's nuclear tests in 1998 had already been waived, we estimated that the initial costs of economic sanctions to India were about $554 million annually. The administration has now waived almost all remaining restrictions.11Sudan:The US Congress withdrew consideration of the Sudan Peace Act, which would have imposed new sanctions on countries that invest in the oil and gas sector in Sudan. Other US economic sanctions have been renewed.China:The Bush administration has held out the possibility of waiving selected sanctions imposed on China after the 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown.Iran:The US government is seeking to vacate a US court judgment against Iran that would award millions of dollars of frozen Iranian assets to former hostages.Turkey:The United States has signaled support for additional IMF loans to Turkey.Azerbaijan:The US Senate is debating a temporary suspension of the 9-year old ban on US military aid to Azerbaijan imposed in response to the conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh.Jordan:Congress approved the US-Jordan Free Trade Agreement.Uzbekistan, as well as several other countries in Central Asia, will probably see economic and military assistance from the United States increase in the coming months. With US support, these countries may also receive increased assistance from the IMF and World Bank.Multilateral SanctionsIn September 2001, the UN Security Council passed a US-proposed resolution that threatens economic sanctions against countries that continue to harbor and support terrorists.12 The UN Security Council Resolution 1373 requires UN members to crack down on financing, training, and movement of terrorists across international borders, deny safe haven to them, freeze financial assets, and prohibit their nationals from making any funds or economic resources available to terrorists. While UN economic sanctions are no silver bullet, it is worth keeping in mind that international pressure helped convince Muammar Gadhafi to extradite the two suspects in the Pan Am bombing, and contributed to Sudan's cooperation with counterterrorism efforts.
AppraisalIn the aftermath of September 11, the Bush administration took all the right initiatives in deploying economic sanctions. It used existing statutory powers to the fullest extent. It enlisted multilateral cooperation in freezing the assets of terrorist groups and their supporters. Notably, on November 18, all G-20 finance ministers (including Saudi Arabian and Indonesian) at US urging agreed to forceful financial measures against terrorist groups. Imaginatively, the Bush administration used the large reservoir of existing US sanctions to supply carrots for newly discovered allies-of-convenience. It worked diligently to speed other financial assistance for these same allies through the halls of the IMF, the World Bank, and similar institutions.Even though the administration did everything right and with considerable flair, it would be illusory to expect that the arsenal of economic sanctions can play more than a modest role in the war against terrorism. There are several reasons to suggest that even the best-conceived measures will have limited effect.First, the history of sanctions against state sponsors shows a very modest record in achieving limited goals (Libya and Sudan are the only success cases and the achievements with those countries are modest). Second, the history of sanctions in the past decade records no instance of success against terrorist groups, such as Hezbollah, Hamas, Abu Nidal, or for that matter, al Qaeda. Since terrorism is their raison d'être, using sanctions to stop these groups amounts to seeking a major policy objective with economic tools. Economic sanctions have almost never succeeded in such cases. Third, in the financial war against drug lords, probably less than 1 percent of a vast ocean of cash has been captured by various asset freezes. Terrorist groups command a far smaller stream of resources than drug lords, and thus present a more elusive target. Even if the economic success rate against terrorists is 10 times as large, that would leave a substantial fraction of resources at their disposal.To say that economic sanctions will play an auxiliary role to intelligence, covert action, and military strikes is not to denigrate their importance. In all of America's wars during the past century-the First and Second World Wars, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, and the Gulf War-sanctions made worthy, if auxiliary, contributions. In the war against terrorism, asset freezes, and other sanctions will pinch. But we cannot count on economic sanctions to bring bin Laden and al Qaeda to heel. Nevertheless, the judicious combinations of sanctions and positive measures (including the selective waiver of existing sanctions) can help build support among the frontline states in the global war against terrorism.
References
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, Jeffrey J. Schott, Kimberly Ann Elliott, assisted by Barbara Oegg. Forthcoming. Economic Sanctions Reconsidered, 3rd edition. Washington: Institute for International Economics.Katzman, Kenneth. 2001. Terrorism: Near Eastern Groups and State Sponsors, 2001. Congressional Research Service. Washington: Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, September 10.Perl, Raphael F. 2001. Terrorism, the Future, and U.S. Foreign Policy. Congressional Research Service. Washington: Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, March 23.Schaefer, Brett D. 2001. Stop Subsidizing Terrorism. Heritage Foundation Backgrounder No. 1485. Washington: Heritage Foundation, October 4.US Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism. 2000. Patterns of Global Terrorism 2000. Washington: Department of State.US Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism. 1999. Patterns of Global Terrorism 1999. Washington: Department of State.
Notes
1. See Gary Clyde Hufbauer, Jeffrey J. Schott, Kimberly Ann Elliott, assisted by Barbara Oegg. Forthcoming. Economic Sanctions Reconsidered. 3rd edition. Washington: Institute for International Economics.2. For a detailed list of targeted entities, see New York Times, 25 September 2001, B4; Washington Post, 25 September 2001, A9.3. Although Congress passed the International Religious Persecution Act in 1998, no additional sanctions were imposed on Sudan. The State Department argued that existing measures meet the requirements of the Act.4. Afghanistan was certified for the first time under Section 40A of the Arms Export Control Act on 22 May 1997. In 1996, the State Department's Office of Defense Trade Controls amended the International Traffic in Arms Regulations to indicate that the United States will not issue licenses authorizing transactions involving Afghanistan.5. Executive Order 12947, 23 January 1995.6. Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, Title III, Section 303, PL 104-132.7. See "First Interlaken Expert Seminar on Targeting UN Financial Sanctions" (March 17-19, 1998), at http://www.smartsanctions.ch/interlaken1.htm; and "Second Interlaken Seminar on Targeting UN Financial Sanctions" (March 29-31, 1999), at http://www.smartsanctions.ch/interlaken2.htm.8. R. Richard Newcomb, Testimony before the Senate Appropriations Committee, Subcommittee on Treasury and General Government, 10 May 2001.9. United Nations International Drug Control Program, Fact Sheet: Economic and Social Consequences of Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, http://www.undcp.un.or.th/econ_soc. Note that the retail value of drugs intercepted at the US border ranged between $1 billion and $2 billion annually in the 1990s. See Statistical Abstract of the United States 2000, table 349. This figure is probably less than 1 percent of the retail value of annual flows across the US border.10. USIS, 11 October 2001; Financial Times, 3 October 2001, 4; Financial Times, 16 October 2001, 5; Washington Post, 2 October 2001, A12.11. The waiver does not apply to Indian and Pakistani entitites included on the Commerce Department's "Entity List" of foreign end users that require individual export licenses for certain US commodities and technologies of proliferation con- cern.12. UN Security Council Resolution 1373, 28 September 2001.

America has shown its best side in recent weeks in the efforts to help the victims of September 11. And it is showing its strength has it moves to strike back and tighten security at home. Dealing with the economic impact of these horrendous crimes has,appropriately, not been the first priority.
But, of course, the economic impact is important. And finding the right economic response to the crisis is a vital part of showing the terrorists they have not undermined the strength of America and its allies.Americans had believed they were safe from aggression in their own country, but today many, understandably, feel nervous about the future. Consumer confidence has fallen—according to a CNN/Time poll, 40percent of consumers plan to cut back on spending and 42 percent plan to cut back travel. Many businesses were directly affected by the crisis, and many others are cautious about new investments.
This policy brief will look at the state of the economy in the aftermath of the attack and at the economic policies that should be used in response to the crisis. Those policies must be chosen that meet the needs of the economy for short-run stimulus, while at the same time preserve the strong economic fundamentals that have supported the extraordinary economic performance of recent years. In short, how do we get America (and the world) working again,while maintaining fiscal discipline and continuing the thrust of openness and globalization?

Once again the steel industry is distressed. And once again Washington is looking for trade “solutions” when it should be searching elsewhere. There is nothing new about either story. But, can’t we do something better this time?

A Short History of Steel Trade
Steel trade has been in turmoil since the late 1960s. Without exaggeration, more Washington trade lawyers work on steel disputes than any other trade issue. To recap the trade saga:
In 1968, US steel producers filed a series of countervailing duty cases against subsidized European steel- makers. These cases led to “voluntary restraint agreements” that were terminated when the global steel market recovered in 1974.1
In 1977, US steel producers filed a series of antidumping cases primarily aimed at Japanese steel firms. These cases led to a system of minimum reference prices for steel imports, known as the “trigger price mechanism” (TPM). The TPM system was soon extended to European steel.
In 1974 and 1979, at both the launch and the ratification of the Tokyo Round of multilateral trade negotiations, the US antidumping law was amended (at the insistence of the steel industry and to conform with the Tokyo Round Antidumping Code), making it easier for domestic producers to prevail in antidumping cases.
In 1982, dissatisfied with the workings of the TPM system, US steel producers filed many antidumping and counter- vailing duty cases. These were resolved by new voluntary restraint agreements, which lasted until 1992.
In the mid-1980s, trade remedy cases were filed against “new” exporters, such as Brazil and Korea. Most of these cases resulted in high antidumping and countervailing duty penalties.
In 1989, the United States launched an effort to negotiate a Multilateral Steel Agreement designed to abolish subsidies. The negotiations failed and were ultimately abandoned in 1997.
In 1992, when the voluntary restraint agreements expired, a new set of trade remedy cases were filed. Many of the resulting penalty duties remain in effect today.
In March 1999, the House of Representatives passed H.R. 975, Congressman Peter Visclosky’s (D-IN) steel quota bill, 289 to 141. After a spirited debate,2 bill was defeated in the Senate. The current round of steel trade initiatives essentially renews the 1999 debate.
Why so much trade turmoil? One reason is persistent overcapacity in the global steel industry abetted by widespread market distortions. Persistent overcapacity has translated into cyclically falling prices and industry losses in every business slowdown. Another reason is the combination of rapid productivity growth and slow demand growth. Wheat farmers and steel workers share two traits: both have greatly increased their output per worker-year and both face sluggish demand for their products. The result is a painful secular decline in employment. These forces—in an effort to cushion the domestic steel industry—have provoked a series of rearguard trade actions.
Fast Productivity and Slow Demand
Between 1990 and 2000, crude steel output per worker-year increased from under 400 tons to nearly 600 tons in the European Union, Japan, and the United States. During the same period, world steel production was essentially flat—786 million metric tons in 1989 and 788 million metric tons in 1999—a decade when world GDP grew by about 30 percent.3 In combination, a 50 percent gain in productivity coupled with zero demand growth meant that steel employment in the three big industrial areas had to fall by a third—and that’s what happened (see table 1). In any industry, labor layoffs of this magnitude are bound to trigger trade friction.

Overcapacity in Steel
In 1998, in the midst of the Asian financial crisis, world steel overcapacity was estimated at 275 million metric tons, against production of 776 million metric tons (see table 2). By these estimates, overcapacity in 1998 exceeded a third of actual production. That was a cyclically high figure, but during the past 30 years, overcapacity has often exceeded 20 percent of production. By these estimates, overcapacity in 1998 exceeded a third of actual production. That was a cyclically high figure, but during the past 30 years, capacity has often exceeded 20 percent of production. Persistent overcapacity of this magnitude translates into downward price pressure, especially during business downturns. The economic logic is simple. Big, integrated steel firms face high fixed costs. Importantly, their fixed costs include not only the familiar cost of interest payments on corporate debt, but also the “legacy costs” of pension, health, and severance benefits promised to both current and retired workers.4
US trade barriers on steel imports
may cause more job losses in US
steel-using industries—such as autos,
heavy equipment, machinery,
and construction—than the number
of jobs saved in steel mills. The reason
is that higher steel costs may force
user industries to raise their
prices and reduce demand.


When fixed costs are high, it makes sense for struggling steel firms to continue running their plants so long as the marginal revenues from extra production at least cover variable costs. Economic logic at the firm level ensures depressed prices—and widespread operating losses—at the industry level.
To be sure, economic logic differs somewhat for mini mills that purchase scrap steel and electricity as their key inputs. For most mini mills, variable costs are high and fixed costs are low. They can shut down more quickly when prices fall. But while mini mills account for a big share of US steel production (over 45 percent), their share of global production is much smaller. The world steel industry is still characterized by integrated steel producers and their overcapacity problems.
Market Distortions
In a normal industry, prolonged operating losses will weed out weak firms. Ideally, steel firms with the highest costs would be the first to close. But the real world is far from ideal. Many plants have closed and steel employment has plummeted. In the United States alone, over the last three years, 18 steel firms went bankrupt and about 23,500 workers lost their jobs.5 However, it is not production costs but rather market distortions that often determine the global “exit order” of struggling firms. Moreover, these distortions prolong the agony of failing firms by stretching the duration of depressed prices for the whole industry.
One such distortion is cartel practices—private arrangements that enable some steel producers to maintain high prices in their home markets and sell abroad at low prices.6 Another distortion is public subsidies used to cover huge fixed costs (debt burdens, pension benefits, etc.).7 The United States is not the worst sinner when it comes to market distortions, but it is hardly free of guilt. Federal guarantee programs totaling several billion dollars have absorbed the pension responsibilities of some bankrupt steel firms and staved off bankruptcy for others.
As a result of these distortions, the least efficient firms are not necessarily the first to close their doors and the industry as a whole sheds its excess capacity at a very slow pace.
A New Round of Trade Actions
These underlying forces—persistent overcapacity, rapid productivity growth, and slow demand growth—have again erupted, as in past episodes, in measures principally designed to limit steel imports—measures mounted by the steel industry, by Congress, and by President Bush.
The steel industry itself has launched numerous antidumping and countervailing duty actions.
The Congress is debating the Steel Revitalization Act of 2001, a direct descendant of the failed Visclosky Steel Quota bill (H.R. 975) of 1999.8
President Bush has launched a new round of international steel negotiations and a Section 201 case.
Industry Answer: Antidumping and Countervailing Duty Actions
One answer to market distortions is provided by the antidumping and countervailing duty laws. Indeed, 159 steel actions have either resulted in antidumping or countervailing duty orders or are under investigation. In fact, about a third of all antidumping cases launched in the United States between 1980 and 1995 were steel cases.9 Steel imports from nearly every country are now subject to one or more antidumping or countervailing duty actions (table 3). These actions cover 44 percent of finished steel imports from countries outside the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and 11 percent of finished steel imports from Canada and Mexico. With such broad coverage, and more cases pending, are not unfair trade remedies adequate to deal with market distortions abroad? The answer is both “yes” and “no”.
The calculated consumer cost
per job saved in the steel industry
[by the Steel Revitalization Act]
is very high, about $360,000 annually.


“Yes”. In the 1970s, the United States dramatically expanded the coverage of its antidumping remedies, largely at the urging of the US steel industry, to encompass not only “classic” dumping (when an industry sells abroad cheaper than at home), but also “below cost” dumping (when an industry sells below its average cost). As a result, the antidumping laws are no longer focused on predatory pricing behavior, their original target.10 Instead, they catch both “fair” and “unfair” trade in a broad net that has become a “user-friendly” safeguard system. It is hard to argue that antidumping remedies do not adequately penalize exports from foreign firms that either operate at a loss or discriminate in their pricing policies. Indeed, most economists contend that US antidumping laws are too heavily slanted in favor of domestic petitioners.11
“No”. However easy it may be for domestic steel firms to prevail in antidumping cases, antidumping remedies cannot create competitive conditions in closed foreign steel markets, nor can they ensure that inefficient plants abroad are shut down. At most, antidumping remedies can shut particular foreign firms out of the US market. Other foreign steel firms may simply fill the market vacuum—substantially diminishing the protective effect of the antidumping order.12
Moreover, there is the serious problem of subsidies, especially when costs are absorbed by the public purse to keep a firm afloat. In the UK Bar case, decided in May 2000, the WTO Appellate Body held that subsidies received by erstwhile state-owned steel firms are effectively discharged once the firm is privatized. The US Commerce Department disagrees, and has not followed the UK Bar example in a number of other countervailing duty cases. In turn, the European Community is threatening to seek WTO permission to retaliate against the department’s refusal to follow the UK Bar precedent.13
Free traders say the United States should not complain when other countries export their steel at bargain prices, whatever the reason—dumping, subsidization, or just plain low costs. Many in Congress disagree. Urged on by the steel industry, they want to erect more comprehensive barriers around the US market than those afforded by the antidumping and countervailing duty statutes.
Congressional Answer: The Steel Revitalization Act of 2001
The Steel Revitalization Act of 2001 (H.R.808 and S.957) is the congressional answer. This bill, which already has 219 cosponsors in the House, would restrict unfinished steel imports over the next five years to their average monthly levels between July 1994 and June 1997.14 This 36-month period was chosen because it precedes the “import surge” of 1998 and depressed conditions in the industry.
Further, the Steel Revitalization Act requires foreign steel exporters to disclose extensive information on their pollution emission and wage levels. This information might eventually provide a springboard for congressional initiatives to impose minimum labor and environmental standards on imported steel.15
The real question facing President Bush
and Congress is whether they
would rather charge American
consumers $3.5 billion annually
for trade protection—and spend
most of the money on steel investors
and lucky importers—or only
$350 million annually for meaningful
benefits to displaced workers.


The bill authorizes additional Treasury guarantees for private loans to the US steel industry, enlarging the authority under the Emergency Steel Loan Guarantee Act of 1999 from $1 billion to $10 billion. Access conditions are also relaxed.16 Like kindred foreign subsidies, Treasury guarantees would prolong the life of failing steel firms and cause more distress to healthy producers.
The Act imposes an excise tax on all steel for the creation of a health care trust fund to cover the “legacy costs” of unemployed and retired steel workers who are left in the cold by bankrupt firms. If necessary, the tax could rise to as high as 1.5 percent of the value of domestic and imported steel. At current average prices and quantities (see table 4), the tax could theoretically rise to $700 million annually.
Healthy US steel firms, such as US Steel, AK Steel, and Nucorp, are not enthusiastic about Treasury guarantees and taxes that would keep their inefficient competitors in business and make healthy firms bear the legacy costs of bankrupt firms. Meanwhile, the Bush Administration is rightly worried that the trade provisions of the Steel Revitalization Act would flatly violate US obligations under the World Trade Organization (WTO),17 invite foreign retaliation, and poison the atmosphere for WTO and FTAA talks.
The President’s Answer: International Negotiations and Section 201
On 5 June 2001, President Bush announced the administration’s own two-part steel strategy—international negotiations and Section 201. The President evidently wants to accomplish multiple objectives with his strategy: help distressed steel firms and workers; head off the Steel Revitalization Act; and, if possible, garner support for new “fast-track” negotiating authority (now labeled trade promotion authority) to credibly negotiate in the WTO and the Free Trade Area of the Americas.16
At an international level, the administration will open negotiations with trading partners to seek “the near-term elimination of inefficient excess capacity in the steel industry worldwide…” and to write “rules that will govern steel trade in the future and eliminate the underlying market-distorting subsidies that led to the current conditions…”
International negotiations
The president’s first goal in international negotiations—to negotiate the closure of inefficient excess capacity—is bound to fail. Inefficient steel mills, almost by definition, are older mills with a long industrial history and many employees. Ultimately, market forces may force them to close, but it is virtually impossible to close them through a political negotiation. Any reasonable definition of “inefficiency” would rank some mills in West Virginia, Pennsylvania, and Indiana below the cutoff mark. Imagine the grief facing the Bush Administration if it tried to persuade Senator John Rockefeller (D-W.VA), Congressman Phil English (R-PA), or Congressman Peter Visclosky (D-IN) to close down “their” mills. Public officials abroad will have similar problems. Just as international negotiations have never satisfactorily retired excess capacity in agricultural commodities—sugar, cocoa, coffee, and wheat—they will not succeed in steel.
The president’s second goal in international negotiations—to write new rules governing future steel trade—has brighter prospects. Later in this policy brief we offer specific recommendations as to what those goals should be. Here we simply observe that new rules will not likely be agreed to in “stand-alone” talks; rather the best prospects are in the context of FTAA and WTO talks.
Section 201
Domestically, the president has requested the United States International Trade Commission (USITC) to launch a case under Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974 to determine whether the steel industry has been “seriously injured” or “threatened by serious injury” from imports. The USITC carries out its analysis product category by product category, provoking a preliminary skirmish on the appropriate definition of steel “products”.19 Also, there’s the tricky matter of steel imports from Canada and Mexico, which enjoy preferential treatment under NAFTA.20 But in a Section 201 case, it makes absolutely no difference whether the imports are “fairly” or “unfairly” traded. All that matters is whether imports are a “substantial cause” of “serious injury” (or threat thereof) to the domestic steel industry.
Under Section 201, the USITC must deliver its report and recommendation within six months, and the president then has 60 days to determine the remedies, if any.21 Under the Agreement on Safeguards adopted in the Uruguay Round, certain restrictions are imposed on Section 201 remedies, if they take the form of trade barriers.22 Among these provisions, quotas should not reduce imports below the level of the last three “representative years”, without a strong justification. Trade barriers should be progressively liberalized. Provided that these and all other provisions of the Agreement on Safeguards are met, Article 8(3) allows the importing country (i.e., the United States) to avoid paying “compensation” to the exporting countries for the first three years of the safeguard measures.23
Section 201 does not require President Bush to impose steel trade barriers, even if the USITC finds that segments of the industry are “seriously injured” and even if it recommends trade barriers. Instead, the president can provide alternative forms of adjustment relief to firms, workers, and communities, and can condition relief on measures taken by the industry to downsize and become more competitive. In providing alternative relief, the president can draw on his existing statutory powers and budget pockets. By self-initiating the Section 201 case, however, President Bush created a strong political presumption that he would eventually restrict imports. But in our recommendations, discussed below, we urge the president to use his Section 201 powers creatively to fashion alternatives to oft-used, but very costly, trade “solutions”.
Strategic interaction
While the domestic and international parts of the president’s strategy are conceptually distinct, they inevitably interact. If the USITC finds that imports cause injury in some product lines, it can propose remedies itself. However, as noted, the president can choose whatever remedies he wants to apply (consistent with the Agreement on Safeguards)—mixing trade barriers, industry assistance, and adjustment requirements. The president can select his remedies to shape developments both in Congress (on the Steel Revitalization Act and other trade issues) and in international negotiations. It should be pointed out that domestic and international political forces pull in different directions: in the congressional steel caucus, Section 201 remedies will be most acceptable as a substitute for the Steel Revitalization Act if they sharply restrict imports; but to coax foreign countries to reduce market distortions, it would be more useful to go easy on import barriers and instead emphasize industry assistance and adjustment requirements—the approach we advocate in this brief.
There is no perfect solution
for the US steel industry’s
problems, but there are certainly
better alternatives than top-heavy
reliance on import barriers.
The better approach would have
two big components: wage insurance,
and trade talks focused on
rules to limit future market
distortions in steel trade.


What Is Wrong with Trade Solutions?
Most trade solutions to the problems of the steel industry—solutions in the form of import barriers—have major flaws. Import barriers are not very good at getting foreign governments to correct their own market distortions. This has been experienced not only by the steel industry, but also by numerous agricultural commodities (dairy, wheat, and corn), telecommunications, civil aviation, and financial services. In very few of these industries have US import barriers persuaded other countries to create more competitive markets. Instead, trade barriers have a way of inspiring “me-too” restrictions abroad, increasing the number of years (or decades) it takes for the industry to adjust worldwide.
Moreover, US trade barriers on steel imports may cause more job losses in US steel-using industries—such as autos, heavy equipment, machinery, and construction—than the number of jobs saved in steel mills. The reason is that higher steel costs may force user industries to raise their prices and reduce demand. In a study commissioned by steel importers, François and Baughman (2001) applied a computable general equilibrium model to estimate that the quota protection envisaged in the Steel Revitalization Act would translate into two jobs lost in other industries for every job gained in the steel industry.24
An equally serious flaw is that import barriers cost US steel users a lot of money via higher prices. Higher steel costs are then passed on to the American public in a multitude of small markups for cars, washing machines, buildings, and practically everything else. Only a fraction of this money reaches distressed workers. Where does the rest of the money go? Mainly to the shareholders and creditors of steel firms, and to lucky importers. Many Americans would be quite happy to pay an extra $50 for a car if all the money reached a steel worker’s pocket. But they would not be so happy if they knew that $34 went to shareholders, creditors, and lucky importers, while $6 was lost to pure inefficiency, leaving only $10 for steel workers.
We illustrate these realities using a model that depicts the impact of the Steel Revitalization Act had it been in force in 2000.25 Table 4 presents the calculations. The cost of the Act to consumers would have been $3.5 billion. Of this amount, about $700 million would go to the 9,700 steel workers called back to the mills.26 About $400 million would be lost to pure inefficiency. This disappearing $400 million represents the costs to the US economy of not using labor and capital where they can produce output with greater value—industries like trucks, machinery, and construction.
Domestic steel shareholders and creditors, together with importers, would capture the rest of the pie, about $2.4 billion, either directly through higher domestic steel prices, or indirectly by controlling the quota tickets for imported steel.27 Since the quota rents amount to $2.2 billion (see table 4), they deserve more explanation. As soon as imported steel is rationed by quantitative restrictions, the right to import steel—the quota ticket—becomes very valuable. In fact, it would be worth about $70 per metric ton of imported steel. Who gets the tickets? That depends on statutory language and lobbying skill. In practice, most of these valuable tickets would probably be awarded to traditional steel importers and to domestic steel firms that process unfinished steel (for example, turning slabs into cold rolled sheets) or augment their US-made steel products with imported goods. Of course, if policy were rational, quota tickets would be auctioned like broadcast bandwidth, not awarded to traditional importers and domestic steel mills. While this idea has enormous merit, lobbying forces have long kept it bottled up.28
Coming to the bottom line, the calculated consumer cost per job saved in the steel industry is very high, about $360,000 annually.29 This is several times the estimated annual compensation of $72,000 per steel worker (earnings of $44,000 plus fringe benefits of $28,000).30
To be blunt, capitalists gobble up the lion’s share of benefits from import barriers. That is the problem with trade solutions. In recent years, to be sure, some steel firms have suffered heavy losses. But a capitalist system works best when capitalists pay for bad judgment or bad luck. In exceptional circumstances, the federal government may buffer them from losses. But after 30 years of “on-again, off-again” trade protection, it’s hard for the steel industry to argue that there’s anything exceptional about stiff competition from foreign producers.
Better Solutions: Wage Insurance and Sensible Trade Talks
There is no perfect solution for the US steel industry’s problems, but there are certainly better alternatives than top-heavy reliance on import barriers. The better approach would have two big components: wage insurance, and trade talks focused on rules to limit future market distortions in steel trade.

Wage Insurance
Lori Kletzer and Robert Litan (2001) advocate an innovative approach—wage insurance—to address the core problem of distressed industries such as steel. The core problem is that displaced workers in the steel industry suffer a big loss in annual earnings when they lose a steel job and subsequently find work in another industry. Table 5 shows the statistical profile of displaced steel workers over the period 1979-99. Overall, comparing displaced workers in all manufacturing industries with displaced steel workers, the steel workers are a little older, a little less educated, have much longer job tenure, and are predominantly male. At the margin, this profile means that displaced steel workers take longer to find a new job and, when they find new work, take a bigger earnings hit than other displaced manufacturing workers. The average period of unemployment for displaced steel workers is 30.6 weeks (versus 18.2 weeks for all manufacturing), the average earnings loss is 34.8 percent (versus 18.2 percent for all manufacturing), and only 61 percent are reemployed in any job (versus 65 percent for all manufacturing).

The idea of wage insurance is to encourage displaced workers to seek new employment, even at a lower wage, rather than collect unemployment benefits for the full 26 weeks normally permitted, or leave the workforce altogether. The Kletzer-Litan proposal has two components:
The federal government would reimburse displaced workers a substantial fraction of the difference between the wage earned on the old job and the wage earned on the new job once the worker is reemployed.
 
Displaced workers would also receive a health insurance subsidy for up to six months as they search for new jobs.
 
These proposed benefits are in addition to unemployment insurance (UI coverage normally lasts for 26 weeks). Kletzer and Litan estimate the additional cost of wage and health insurance for all displaced workers would have been about $3 billion in 1999. The steel industry would be the ideal place to try out the wage insurance concept. Our proposal, sketched out in table 6, has somewhat more generous insurance parameters than Kletzer and Litan propose. In particular, we propose that wage insurance should cover 75 percent of the earnings loss for two years, rather than the 50 percent coverage recommended by Kletzer and Litan (2001). 31
In addition, we think the insurance program for the steel workers should address two unique features. First, some benefits should be paid to the 23,500 steel workers who were laid off in the last three years. We suggest 75 percent of the earnings loss for one year, for those who actually got new jobs (estimated at 14,000 workers). Second, something should be done about the so-called “legacy costs”. Legacy costs represent health and pension benefits that will be lost altogether if the responsible steel corporation goes bankrupt.32 In the case of pension benefits, the federal government already pays these costs under the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC). But there is no safety net for health benefits. On this point, we agree with the Steel Revitalization Act: a mechanism should be created to provide a safety net for health benefits.
Table 6 summarizes the arithmetic of our wage insurance and legacy cost proposal. The 23,500 steel workers displaced between 1997 and 2000 who have since been reemployed (estimated at 14,000 workers) would, on average, receive $11,500 of wage insurance. The total cost of this “make-up” wage insurance would be about $161 million.
Over the next ten years, we project annual steel job losses at the rate that occurred between 1990 and 1999, about 5,000 jobs a year. With wage insurance, we assume that 75 percent of the displaced workers would get new jobs (compared with the historical average of only 61 percent). On average, each worker would be paid wage insurance of $23,000 for the earnings loss—old steel job versus new job in ansurance costs would amount to about $86 million annually for the next ten years.
Legacy costs must also be considered. Estimates are rough, but available figures suggest that legacy costs (both pension and health benefits) are $30 to $65 per ton of production by integrated mills (about 55 percent of total US steel production). In other words, total legacy costs in the integrated steel industry are between $1.7 billion and $3.6 billion. Assuming that 10 percent of integrated steel production closes annually for the next ten years (a worst case scenario), annual legacy costs would run between $170 million and $360 million. The existing PBGC would cover pension benefits, but health benefits would need to be covered by a new program. We assume the annual average total for legacy costs (both pension and health benefits) would run about $265 million. Box 1 concretely illustrates our wage insurance and legacy cost proposal, using the example of Weirton Steel.
By our arithmetic, the lump sum outlay for wage insurance paid to workers displaced between 1997 and mid-2001 is about $161 million. The prospective other industry. Following this arithmetic, wage in annual expenditure on wage insurance and legacy costs for the steel industry would run about $350 million each year over the next ten years. In other words, the prospective budget expenditure is only one-tenth of the annual consumer cost of steel quotas. The real question facing President Bush and Congress is whether they would rather charge American consumers $3.5 billion annually for trade protection—and spend most of the money on steel investors and lucky importers—or only $350 million annually for meaningful benefits to displaced workers. Once the USITC finishes its work on the Section 201 case, President Bush could easily choose the sensible alternative, and ask Congress for the power and purse to implement a wage insurance program that genuinely helps displaced steel workers.
Sensible trade talks
In addition to sensible decisions for the domestic steel industry, we need sensible international negotiations. These talks should be conducted, if possible, within the larger and far more important context of WTO and FTAA negotiations. Sensible steel talks should help the larger trade agenda, not hinder it.
International steel negotiations should seek to fulfill three objectives. The first is to write new subsidy rules that would reverse the WTO decision in the UK Bar case—the decision that effectively “wiped out” a history of subsidization (however long and deep), once a steel plant was privatized. Otherwise, China, Russia, Ukraine, and a few other countries will be tempted to modernize their steel industries on the public purse, “strip” the fixed costs from distressed firms, and privatize steel plants at a fraction of the historic cost. The outcome? A new wave of subsidized steel will flood world markets. In place of the UK Bar rule, new rules should attribute past subsidies to any successor firm.
The second goal should be the creation of a reliable system within the WTO for affirmatively certifying, at the request of individual WTO members, that their steel markets are completely open to foreign producers, and that market access is not burdened by public or private restrictive practices. Restrictive practices include cartels of any sort, tariffs above a low rate, any limits on foreign investment, and public subsidies. Beyond the absence of restrictions, the certified country would need to positively demonstrate open market access, for example by evidence of open tendering by steel users, and substantial imports from foreign suppliers.
The third goal would be to write a safe harbor, within the WTO Antidumping Code, for steel imported from certified “open market” countries—those with open trade and investment access. Imports from certified countries would be subject to antidumping orders only if they were dumped according to the classical definition—exported at a lower price than home market price. Steel sales below average costs would not, for that reason alone, be subject to antidumping duties. US steel firms often sell steel below average cost; there is no reason why foreign steel firms that operate in an open market should not be able to do the same.

Reversing the UK Bar decision—together with affirmative “open market” certification and the antidumping safe harbor—would provide substantial incentives for countries to curtail the market distortions that have proved so troublesome for so long to the world steel industry. At the same time, this package of international rules should prove to be attractive to steel exporters and a positive incentive to launch WTO and FTAA negotiations.
It’s Up to President Bush!
Over the next six months, President Bush has the power to skillfully conclude the steel initiatives he announced on 5 June 2001, and to make trade policy history. He can use the Section 201 case to pioneer a meaningful program of wage insurance for displaced steel workers. At the same time, he can shape steel negotiations in a way that points to the end of market distortions and the reform of antidumping laws, while giving a push to WTO and FTAA talks. Or he can fall back on the tried and failed “solution” of import barriers. When you think about it—and when the president thinks about it—there is only one right path.
References:
American Iron and Steel Institute. 2000. December 2000 Selected Steel Industry Data. 18 June 2001.
Bergsten, C. Fred, Kimberly Ann Elliott, Jeffrey J. Schott, and Wendy E. Takacs. 1987. Auction Quotas and United States Trade Policy. Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Blonigen, Bruce. 2001. U.S. Antidumping Case-specific Data, 1980-1995. 21 June 2001.
Boltuck, Richard and Robert E. Litan, editors, 1991. Down in the Dumps: Administration of the Unfair Trade Laws. Washington: The Brookings Institution.
Christmas, Ian. 2000. IISI Survey Reveals Renewed World Steel Consumption Growth. 18 June 2001.
Finger, J. Michael, editor. 1993. Antidumping: How It Works and Who Gets Hurt. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
François, Joseph F. and Laura Baughman. 2001. Costs to American Consuming Industries of Steel Quotas and Taxes. Washington: The Consuming Industries Trade Action Coalition Foundation. 18 June 2001.
Howell, Thomas R. 1998. The Trade Remedies: A U.S. Perspective. In Trade Strategies for a New Era: Ensuring U.S. Leadership in a Global Economy, eds. Geza Feketekuty and Bruce Stokes. New York: Council on Foreign Relations and Monterey Institute of International Studies.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde and Howard Rosen. 1986. Trade Policy for Troubled Industries. Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde and Kimberly Ann Elliott. 1994. Measuring the Costs of Protectionism in the United States. Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde and Jeffrey J. Schott. 1993. NAFTA: An Assessment. Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde and Erika Wada. 1999. Steel Quotas: A Rigged Lottery. International Economics Policy Brief 99-5. Washinton: Institute for International Economics. International Economics. June.
International Iron and Steel Institute. 2001a. Crude Steel Production Per Employee. http://www.worldsteel.org/trends_indicators/figures_20.html, 18 June 2001.
International Iron and Steel Institute. 2001b. Employment in the steel industry, 1974, 1990, 1996-2000. 18 June 2001.
International Iron and Steel Institute. 2001c. World crude steel production, 1950 to 2000. 18 June 2001.
Lindsey, Brink. 1999. The U.S. Antidumping Law: Rhetoric vs. Reality. Washington: Center for Trade Policy Studies, Cato Institute.
Kletzer, Lori G. and Robert E. Litan. 2001. A Prescription to Relieve Worker Anxiety. International Economics Policy Brief 01-02. Washington: Institute for International Economics and The Brookings Institution. February.
Maddison, Angus. 2001. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Messerlin, Patrick A. 1996. “Competition Policy and Antidumping Reform: An Exercise in Transition.” In The World Trading System: Challenges Ahead, ed. Jeffrey J. Schott. Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Jeffrey J. Schott. 1994. The Uruguay Round: An Assessment. Washington: Institute for International Economics.tional Economics, 162-63.
Sharkey, Andrew G. 2001. The CITAC Study: Flawed Model, Biased Conclusions. Washington: American Iron and Steel Institute. 18 June 2001.
Szamosszegi, Andrew. 2000. Cross-Border Cartels and the Steel Trade: The Impacts of the Europe, Japan Club. Washington: Economic Strategy Institute.
United States International Trade Commission. 2001. USITC Interactive Tariff and Trade DataWeb. Washington: USITC. http://dataweb.usitc.gov/scripts/user_set.asp, 18 June 2001.
US Department of Commerce, International Trade Administration. 2000. Global Steel Trade: Structural Problems and Future Solutions. Washington: US Department of Commerce. 18 June 2001.
US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2001. Average Weekly Hours and Average Weekly Overtime Hours of Production Workers for the Manufacturing Industry, January 1999 to present. Washington: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Box 1: How Our Arithmetic Works: A Hypothetical Case
It is worthwhile applying the arithmetic of our suggested answer to one hypothetical case: Weirton Steel, the eighth largest steel producer in the United States, located in Weirton, West Virginia.1 This employee-owned mill, bought by the workers from National Steel in 1982, has 4,100 workers. Since 1905, Weirton Steel has been the dominant employer in Weirton, now a town of 20,000 people. Since 1990, output per worker has doubled, owing in part to public guarantees for about $1.2 billion of investment in better productivity and a cleaner environment. Despite these improvements, depressed conditions have brought Weirton Steel to the brink of bankruptcy. Suppose Weirton closes, how would wage insurance work? Unemployment in two countries straddling Weirton is around 4 percent, but nearly all the jobs pay significantly less than the steel industry. Assume the average steel worker loses annual earnings of $15,300 when he takes a new job, and assume that wage insurance covers 75 percent of the earnings losses for two years. Wage insurance payments to these 4,100 workers would total about $94 million, assuming they all get new jobs. In addition, the federal government would pay “legacy costs”—health and pension benefits—of about $105 million. The pension component of legacy costs would be paid by the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation, while the health component would be paid by a new health care trust fund. The total federal cost of wage insurance and legacy costs would be about $200 million.
1. Most of the information and figures in this example are based on the report in the Financial Times, 13 June 2001, 8.
Notes
1. Inflation concerns and a famous lawsuit, Consumers Union v. Kissinger (506 F.2nd 136) 1974, also contributed to the termination of the voluntary restraint agreements.
2. See Hufbauer and Wada (1999).
3. See International Iron and Steel Institute (2001b, 2001c); Maddison (2001). Steel demand was flat, despite economic growth, because many user industries engineered lighter products and products that substituted other materials for steel.
4. In Japan, Korea, and many European countries, it is legally or politically unacceptable to lay off workers; as a result, in these countries, wage payments almost amount to a fixed cost from the standpoint of the firm. However, from the standpoint of steel production technology, these labor inputs are still variable costs.
5. Sharkey (2001), 1, cites 23,500 jobs lost in the last three years.
6. See Szamosszegi (2000).
7. Likewise, when a firm discharges its obligations through bankruptcy, a similar subsidy occurs, but in this case the subsidy is paid not by taxpayers at large but by unlucky bondholders and employees.
8. See Hufbauer and Wada (1999).
9. See Blonigen (2001).
10. The vast majority of antidumping cases penalize imports sold in the US market below the foreign cost of production, and price discrimination is seldom an issue.
11. Among critical economists, see Boltuck and Litan (1991), Finger (1993), Messerlin (1996), and Lindsey (1999). Among analysts who endorse the US antidumping statutes, see Howell (1998) and Mastel (1998).
12. While domestic steel producers regret losing “market opportunities” to rival foreign steel imports, free traders regard this possibility as a saving grace of the antidumping laws.
13. The Wall Street Journal, 12 June 2001, p. A14, and Inside U.S. Trade, vol. 19, no. 24, 15 June 2001, 8.
14. For unfinished products, such as iron ore, pig iron, slabs and billets, the Act limits the tonnage of imports to the average monthly level between July 1994 and June 1997. For finished steel products, the Act limits the share of imports in domestic consumption to the level achieved between July 1994 and June 1997 (in other words, a greater quantity of finished steel imports would be permitted if US consumption rises). All quotas are established for individual products, apparently with no transfer between product categories.
15. If steel importers are required to report on foreign pollution and wage conditions, the law might also serve as a template for other US industries seeking “process protection”.
16. Because of tight access conditions, the entire $1 billion of available guarantees has not been used.
17. See Hufbauer and Wada (1999) for an analysis of the import quota provisions of the 1999 Visclosky bill (H.R. 975). The quota provisions in the Steel Revitalization Act of 2001 would, in a similar fashion, violate the WTO. The requirement of importers to report the pollution and wage conditions of foreign steel is new to the Steel Revitalization Act of 2001, and arguably creates a novel violation of the WTO.
18. Very commonly, either to launch or conclude international trade negotiations, past presidents have tossed protectionist bones to particular industries. This happened at the launch of the Kennedy Round in 1962 (new restraints on textile and apparel imports), at the launch of the Tokyo Round in 1974 (new antidumping provisions), at the conclusion of the Tokyo Round in 1979 (additional antidumping provisions and new quota protection for textiles and apparel), in the run-up to the Uruguay Round (protection for autos, semiconductors, steel, and other industries), at the launch of the US-Canada Free Trade Agreement (excluding maritime and road transport) and at the conclusion of NAFTA (special deals for sugar and road transport).
19. For these and other details, see Inside U.S. Trade, vol. 19, no. 24, 15 June 2001, 4.
20. Under NAFTA, US steel imports from Canada and Mexico are exempt from safeguard measures, unless the NAFTA member ranks among the top five foreign suppliers of the particular steel product to the US market, and unless those exports “contribute importantly” to serious injury or threat of serious injury. Overall, both Canada and Mexico rank among the top five suppliers of steel to the US market; however, they may not be among the top five for products where the ITC finds serious injury; and in any event their exports may not contribute importantly to the injury. To confuse matters further, in the Wheat Gluten case, the WTO ruled that if imports from Canada and Mexico are counted in an ITC determination of
of injury, then the NAFTA partners must also be subject to the safeguards remedy. See Hufbauer and Schott (1993, 136-37) and Inside U.S. Trade, vol. 19, no. 24. 15 June 2001, 6.
21. The President can provide interim relief 90 days after the case is filed if the ITC finds “critical circumstances”. It does not appear, however, that the President’s Section 201 case will seek a finding of “critical circumstances”. See Inside U.S. Trade, vol. 19, no. 24, 15 June 2001, 4.
22. See Schott (1994).
23. In WTO terms, “compensation” traditionally refers to trade liberalization by the importing country that enables greater sales of other products sold by the exporting country. The idea is to maintain the “balance” of concessions that was in place (and “bound” under WTO agreements) prior to the safeguard measures.
24. The computable general equilibrium (CGE) model used by François and Baughman (2001) traces the impact of steel import barriers on downstream industries and the entire economy. They estimate that the Steel Revitalization Act would create 4,022 jobs in the steel industry, but destroy 10,306 jobs in steel-consuming industries (assuming full employment; see their table 3a). For a critique of François and Baughman (2001), see Sharkey (2001). Sharkey’s criticisms would also apply (if valid) to our partial equilibrium calculations. However, we do not think Sharkey’s criticisms are valid.
25. For these calculations, we use the computable partial equilibrium model, explained in Hufbauer and Elliott (1994). A partial equilibrium model only reflects events in the steel industry—not events in downstream user industries or the rest of the economy. In making our calculations, we assume that the quantitative restrictions required by the Steel Revitalization Act would apply with equal force (in terms of percentage reduction in steel imports) to unfinished and finished steel.
26. The figure of $0.7 billion reaching steel workers is based on the assumption that average compensation (earnings plus all fringe benefits) per steel worker is $72,000 annually ($36 an hour, for 2,000 hours of work per year—probably figures that are too high), and that 9,737 additional steel workers would be employed following imposition of quotas under the Steel Revitalization Act. Notice that the total producers gain (table 4) is calculated at $0.9 billion. After subtracting $0.7 billion for additional compensation, the amount of producer gain left for the steel mills is $0.15 billion. Steel mills would probably get more—because the figure of $72,000 annual compensation is too high, and the mills would probably not call 9,700 workers back to the job. In addition, steel mills would capture a large chunk of the quota rent, discussed below.
27. The $2.4 billion is calculated as follows (from table 4): producer gain of $0.9 billion, minus the compensation cost of 9,737 additional steel workers, $0.7 billion, plus the quota rent of $2.2 billion.
28. See Hufbauer and Rosen (1986) and Bergsten, Elliott, Schott, and Takacs (1987). If policy was superrational, the funds raised by an auction of steel quotas would be dedicated to downsizing the steel industry and helping distressed workers and communities. In the practical logrolling that surrounds most protectionist policies, valuable quota tickets are instead used to reward supporters and to “buy off” losers. For example, some steel importers may bring less steel into the US market, but get a better price for each ton imported.
29. The consumer costs of $3.5 billion translates into $360,000 annually for each of the additional 9,737 steel industry jobs created by the Steel Revitalization Act (table 4). The cost per job, while extremely high, is significantly lower than the $800,000 figure cited in Hufbauer and Wada (1999). The reason is that Hufbauer and Wada (1999) assumed that the elasticity of domestic steel supply was 0.65 (based on a parameter for flat-rolled steel cited in Hufbauer and Elliott, 1994). For these calculations we assume that the supply elasticity is 3.00, a much higher supply response. Excess steel capacity is now larger than before, and mini mills have high importance in the industry as a whole, but low importance for flat-rolled steel. Both factors argue for a higher supply elasticity.
30. Based on the American Iron and Steel Institute (2000), steel workers had average hourly wages and benefits totaling $36 in 2000. Average hourly earnings were about $22, indicating average hourly benefits of $14. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2001), the average annual hour figure (excluding overtime) for all production workers was 2,160. We assume 2,000 hours for steel workers (on account of slack industry conditions), suggesting average annual compensation (earnings plus benefits) of $72,000 and average annual earnings of $44,000.
31. To save space, we do not spell out the various antiabuse provisions that would need to accompany any wage insurance program. See Kletzer and Litan (2001).
32. Another legacy cost is severe environmental pollution at the sites of older steel mills. These mills were built and operated decades before the Environmental Protection Agency was created and strict environmental standards were imposed on plant operators—and all subsequent landowners. When these mills fail, the federal government will have to assume responsibility for the cleanup costs. Otherwise, no sensible private corporation will come close to these sites.

Kimberly Ann Elliott is a research fellow at the Institute for International Economics. She is the editor of Corruption and the Global Economy (1997), and coauthor of Can Labor Standards Improve under Globalization? (forthcoming 2003).
This November, trade ministers from the United States and more than 100 other countries will gather in Doha, Qatar, with the goal of launching a new multilateral round of trade negotiations. Space permitting, hundreds or thousands of protestors will also gather to condemn the unwillingness of the World Trade Organization (WTO) to give more serious attention to the negative consequences of globalization for workers and the environment. As in Seattle in 1999, however, the number of protestors in the streets will be less important in determining the outcome in Doha than whether or not US Trade Representative Robert Zoellick has “trade promotion authority” from the US Congress to bolster his position. Without it, any WTO commitment to negotiate is likely to be weak. But getting it will require that the administration and Congress find a way to address the labor and environment concerns of key constituents in this country, while still preserving enough flexibility for Mr. Zoellick to be able to negotiate effectively at the international table.
Rebuilding a bipartisan coalition in favor of further trade liberalization requires progress on at least three related initiatives: 1
A domestic policy package that reduces the costs of job loss and in the long run better prepares workers to take advantage of the opportunities created by globalization.
An international policy package that strengthens the parallel tracks devoted to promoting international labor standards and protecting the environment, while not ruling out the possibility that the WTO will have to address areas where these issues directly intersect with international trade and investment issues.
Reform of the process for authorizing and implementing trade agreements.
The Domestic Policy Package
Enforcement of core labor standards in low-wage countries is inherently desirable but will do little to help American workers cope with the downsides of globalization. For that reason, we believe domestic policy proposals should be in the forefront of the overall package. Moreover, the need to renew the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program this year offers an opportunity to further help workers cope with an increasingly global economy. In addition to overhauling US adjustment and training programs to make them more coherent and more effective, Congress should also consider “wage insurance,” a relatively simple and inexpensive idea that addresses key weaknesses in existing programs.
There are two motivations behind adding wage insurance to the worker adjustment package. The first is the accumulating evidence that worker anxiety about job loss and subsequent earnings losses is increasing, even in periods of low unemployment such as the one we have enjoyed in recent years. The second is the accumulating evidence that the form of worker training that produces the best outcomes is on-the-job training.
Getting trade promotion
authority will require that the
administration and Congress find
a way to address the labor and
environment concerns of key
constituents in this country,
while still preserving enough
flexibility for Mr. Zoellick
to be able to negotiate effectively
at the international table.
Wage insurance promotes on-the-job training and avoids other costs of longer unemployment by encouraging workers to go back to work as soon as possible. It does this by compensating part of the wage loss if a new job pays less than the old one. For example, wage insurance might make up 50 percent of the gap between the new and the old wage for the first two years of reemployment. An alternative approach would be to start the subsidy at a higher rate initially, perhaps 70 percent or so, and then to phase it down over two to three years. A plan developed by Lori Kletzer and Robert Litan, which for reasons of both efficiency and equity covers all dislocated workers, would cost $2 billion to $4 billion annually, depending on the size of the benefit and the unemployment rate.2
In addition, loss of health insurance is another major source of anxiety among workers and their families. Although, displaced workers have the right under current law to continue employer-provided medical policies, many cannot afford the premiums. Thus, the Kletzer and Litan proposal also includes a subsidy to offset the costs of health insurance at an additional cost of perhaps $1 billion annually. In the long run, systematic reforms to ensure that all Americans have access to affordable health care, regardless of their job status, would reduce the costs of, and facilitate adjustment to, economic shocks from any source.
Continuing attention to the effectiveness of primary and secondary education is also an important part of the long-run reforms needed to better prepare Americans to participate in a global economy. In the coming years, development of programs that encourage firms to provide more on-the-job training and encourage workers to engage in lifetime learning would also be desirable.
The International Policy Package
Linking trade to labor and environmental issues is anathema in much of the developing world because of fears that these issues will be used as an excuse to discriminate against their exports. The developing world’s worst fear is that labor and environmental standards will become a springboard for private rights of action, akin to the antidumping statute. While safeguards against protectionist abuse are clearly possible, past experience, particularly in the negotiations on intellectual property, gives poor countries little reason to think that WTO rules in these new areas would necessarily serve their interests. There could be some movement if US negotiators put something on the table that is of interest to the developing countries. But the opposition is not simply tactical and the range of possible outcomes, on the labor issue in particular, is quite limited.
This suggests that the guiding principle in writing legislative language on these issues should be permissive—not requiring anything as a condition of agreement, but not excluding anything either. A second principle should be that the WTO is not the appropriate body to set or enforce labor and environmental standards, but that it should address trade-related violations of these standards. In order to guard against protectionist abuse, it should do so only in a fashion that provides for multilateral review and should not provide for a private right of action. Not only will broad WTO enforcement of these standards never be acceptable to most of our trading partners, but it would also not be as effective as the proponents believe.3
On labor, the International Labor Organization (ILO) has the experience, the people, and the incentive to promote and enforce labor standards. That is its reason for being, not the WTO’s. As demonstrated by the recent actions against Burma over forced labor, the ILO also has constitutional power to authorize members to impose sanctions to enforce its standards if the members have the will to do so. It is also increasing technical assistance to member countries, particularly to combat child labor, and is shining a spotlight on compliance with all the core labor standards under the “Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work.” What the ILO needs is more resources and more political support, a process that has begun but needs to be sustained and expanded.4 In particular, it is essential that the Bush administration reconsider its decision to sharply cut back the budget for international labor programs, including the ILO.
In the WTO, a limited agenda is appropriate but politically difficult and little progress should be expected in the short run. An agreement to interpret GATT Article XX(e) as covering all forms of forced labor, rather than just prison labor, might be possible and would help to boost WTO credibility. A joint commission or cooperative body that brings together the WTO, the ILO, and perhaps others to examine the costs and benefits for the economic development of export processing zones (EPZs), including the treatment of workers in those zones, would also be helpful. EPZs are the most readily identifiable face of globalization and they often compete with one another in offering incentives to foreign investors and, in labor-intensive sectors, use low labor costs to attract multinational investments. Given these characteristics, EPZs are a logical place for the ILO and WTO to work together to demonstrate that trade and labor standards can reinforce one another in raising living standards in poor countries.5
In addition to overhauling
US adjustment and training
programs to make them more
coherent and more effective,
Congress should also consider
“wage insurance,” a relatively
simple and inexpensive idea
that addresses key weaknesses
in existing programs.
On the environment, the answers are not as straightforward because the issues are broader and more complex.6 Because there is no single organization to defer to on the environment, the most logical WTO reform would be to negotiate language clarifying the relationship between international trade rules and multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs). The procedure adopted by the Clinton administration for reviewing the environmental implications of trade agreements is also a useful innovation and apparently will be continued by the Bush administration. Encouraging the UN Environmental Program to do this on a global scale, at least with respect to sensitive sectors such as agriculture, fisheries, and forests, would also be helpful.
Note that none of these proposals—on forced labor, EPZs, or MEAs—would require changes in US law; hence, agreements in these areas would not have to be included in implementing legislation. (Even an agreement to allow trade sanctions in response to violations of worker rights in EPZs, which is unlikely in the current international environment, could be handled using section 301.) This suggests that fast-track or “trade promotion authority” language could, as a legal matter, be broad and general; perhaps something like,
Principal negotiating objectives of the United States include:

to ensure that international rules liberalizing trade, promoting core labor standards, and protecting the environment are compatible and mutually reinforcing and, to this end, encourage closer collaboration between the World Trade Organization, the International Labor Organization, the UN Environmental Program, and other relevant bodies; and
to ensure that derogation from national laws governing labor and environment is not used by a country or its industries to gain competitive advantage in international trade.
The “Fast-Track” Process
Whatever its name—fast track or trade promotion authority, as suggested by USTR Zoellick—a procedure that constrains Congress to an up-or-down vote on large, complex trade agreements with many parties is essential to US negotiating credibility. In exchange for congressional restraint, provisions requiring the executive branch to consult closely with Congress and keep it informed at all stages of a trade negotiation should be beefed up.
On labor, the International Labor
Organization has the experience, the
people, and the incentive to promote
and enforce labor standards.
That is its reason for being,
not the WTO’s.
One means of affirming basic American support for international trade liberalization, while also ensuring that the executive branch does not surprise the Congress with unanticipated negotiations, would be to adopt a two-tiered approach.7 The first tier would grant permanent authority to the President to negotiate trade agreements while the second tier would require him or her to come back to Congress for specific authority for particular negotiations. As in the past, the first tier would set out general procedures for negotiation and approval of trade agreements, including reporting and consultation requirements during the negotiation and the process for Congress to vote on implementing legislation expeditiously. By tradition, the USTR consults with the key congressional committees during the process of preparing and implementing legislation, but Congress could ensure its role in the process by writing that tradition into law.
Because there is no single
organization to defer to on the
environment, the most logical
WTO reform would be to
negotiate language clarifying the
relationship between international
trade rules and multilateral
environmental agreements.
This first-tier general authority would also have to specify procedures for approving a second-tier request for authority to negotiate specific agreements. The executive branch would not be able to invoke negotiating authority until it requests it and Congress approves plans for specific negotiations. Congressional approval, perhaps by concurrent resolution, could be in the form of either an expedited affirmative vote or a negative veto. In designing this feature, there is a potential trade-off between efficiency and control. It would, in some ways, be easier for all concerned to deal with a single request encompassing all the negotiations planned in a particular period (for example, the Free Trade Area of the Americas, a new multilateral round, and the proposed bilateral free trade agreement with Singapore) rather than considering each separately. On the other hand, some in Congress will naturally be concerned about having to accept some negotiations they are not comfortable with in order to get negotiations they want—as in 1991 when President George H. W. Bush requested an extension of fast track to complete the Uruguay Round and also to negotiate the North American Free Trade Agreement. It might be best to keep this language as general as possible and then decide on a case-by-case basis how to package various negotiations.
* * *
In sum, both the substance and the process of trade negotiations have come under attack in recent years and building broad support for continued liberalization requires paying attention to both. A study last year by the Program on International Policy Attitudes at the University of Maryland showed that public support for trade liberalization jumped sharply when it was coupled with adjustment assistance for displaced workers and minimum labor standards.7 Talking about renewing TAA and strengthening parallel tracks for labor and the environment is a start, but it is also necessary to walk the walk.
Notes
1. For additional recommendations on how to revitalize the US trade agenda, see Gary Clyde Hufbauer, World Trade after Seattle: Implications for the United States, International Economics Policy Brief 99-10, Institute for International Economics, 1999.
2. Lori G. Kletzer and Robert E. Litan, A Prescription to Relieve Worker Anxiety, International Economics Policy Brief 01-2, Institute for International Economics and Brookings Institution, 2001.
3. Kimberly Ann Elliott, “Getting Beyond No…! Promoting Worker Rights and Trade,” in The WTO after Seattle, Jeffrey J. Schott, editor, Institute for International Economics, 2000.
4. Kimberly Ann Elliott, The ILO and Enforcement of Core Labor Standards, International Economics Policy Brief 00-6, Institute for International Economics, updated April 2001.
5. Kimberly Ann Elliott and Richard B. Freeman, “Global Labor Standards and Free Trade: The Siamese Twins of the Global Economy,” prepared for a conference on “The Impact on Health of Global Inequalities at Work,” Harvard University Center for Society and Health, Boston, 20-22 June, 2001.
6. For a more detailed proposal on the environment and trade, see John J. Audley, "A Greener Fast Track: Putting Environmental Protection on the Trade Agenda," Working Paper No. 22, Washington: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace; available at: http://www.ceip.org/files/Publications/wp22.asp.
7. The section draws heavily on I.M. Destler, Renewing Fast-Track Legislation, Policy Analyses in International Economics 50. Institute for International Economics, 1997.
8. University of Maryland, Program on International Policy Attitudes. 2000. Americans on Globalization: A Study of Public Attitudes. College Park, MD, March. http://www.pipa.org/OnlineReports/Globalization/global_rep.html.
The author is a senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics. He served as assistant secretary of the US Treasury for international affairs from December 1998 to January 2001. Before joining the US Treasury, he was director and later staff director of the Division of International Finance of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System beginning in June 1977. He joined the staff of the Federal Reserve in July 1972 and was on the staff of the Federal Open Market Committee from March 1977 until he resigned from the Federal Reserve.This policy brief is based on remarks delivered on 23 February 2001, at an American Enterprise Institute Conference "Is It Really Good Policy to Pay Off Publicly Held Treasury Debt?" and on testimony delivered on 22 March 2001, before the Committee on the Budget of the US Senate. IntroductionThe debate about what to do with the projected substantial federal budget surpluses over the next 10 years focuses on three basic options: cut taxes, increase expenditures, and retire or pay down federal debt. The result will be a combination. The issue is that of relative proportions. Larger tax cuts imply that a smaller share of projected surpluses will be devoted to increasing expenditures or paying down debt. Paying down more debt means that tax cuts or expenditure increases will have to be smaller.Consequently, the arcane subject of debt management has come under intense scrutiny as part of the larger debate over the budget surpluses. That scrutiny focuses on two analytical questions, one normative and one positive: How much US Treasury debt in the hands of the public should be paid down? How much US Treasury debt can be paid down? Both questions have international aspects, which are the principal focus of this policy brief.I conclude that, as long as the overall health of a growing US economy is maintained, longer-term prosperity will be enhanced by maximizing the extent to which we pay down the Treasury's debt. The international economic and financial implications are fundamentally benign if the process is part of a coherent, credible, and confidence-inducing long-term fiscal policy strategy, and the technical aspects are well prepared.As long as the overall health of a growing US economy is maintained, longer-term prosperity will be enhanced by maximizing the extent to which we pay down the Treasury's debt.Market institutions and market participants adjust- and already are adjusting-to changes in the economic and financial environment, including the reality and the prospect of a substantially reduced availability of US Treasury obligations.Foreign holders (private or official) do not present an obstacle to paying down at reasonable cost to American taxpayers a significant amount of outstanding Treasury debt maturing after 2011.The largest international risk with respect to paying down the debt is that a failure to carry it through undermines international confidence in US economic and financial policies (specifically hard-won achievements in eliminating fiscal deficits and sustaining that record of fiscal rectitude for several years), and reduces national saving in the face of a growing current account deficit. If confidence in US economic and financial policies is undermined by decisions on longer-term fiscal policy, it could contribute to a collapse of the dollar on foreign exchange markets and, thereby, adversely affect the overall performance of the US economy.Macroeconomic ConsiderationsPaying down the $3.4 trillion in publicly held US Treasury debt (including debt held by the Federal Reserve) should be a net benefit to the US economy. As Chairman Greenspan has testified, "all else being equal, a declining level of federal debt is desirable because it holds down long-term real interest rates, thereby lowering the cost of capital and elevating private investment."1 As a result, the capital stock would be larger, the US economy would be more productive, and standards of living would be raised for most Americans. The central question is whether we can reasonably assume that everything else would be equal.The international economic and financial implications are fundamentally benign if the process is part of a coherent, credible, and confidence-inducing long-term fiscal policy strategy, and the technical aspects are well prepared.Answering this question with regard to fiscal policy involves issues in addition to matters of debt-management policy. For example, is projected aggregate demand likely to be too weak or too strong in the period immediately ahead and beyond? What is the proper role and size of the federal government in society? How should a better balance between saving and investment in the economy be achieved? The principal, significant economic issue is whether the associated trajectory for US Treasury debt, appropriately measured and discounted, can reasonably be expected to be sustainable. The US economy can maintain full employment with a debt of 40, 20, zero, or minus 10 percent of GDP so long as the path is not explosive. However, that is a low bar. The key issue for fiscal policy is which of these levels of debt is optimal for the overall longer-term health of the economy; recent experience suggests that lower is better.Similarly, with respect to monetary policy, the stability of the US financial system does not require that the Federal Reserve purchase only US Treasury debt for the asset side of its balance sheet to match increases in its liabilities. For many decades, it has been convenient to implement US monetary policy primarily within such a framework. Absent sufficient US Treasury debt to continue to operate within that familiar framework, technical questions will have to be addressed and, perhaps, laws changed. However, as Chairman Greenspan has reported, the Federal Reserve is well on its way toward meeting the challenge to the implementation of monetary policy associated with the prospective decline in Treasury debt outstanding.2 It will find acceptable substitutes, though ultimately the Federal Reserve may have to ask Congress to broaden its authority order to do so, for example, to permit the Federal Reserve to purchase a wider range of assets or operate in a wider range of markets. There is, moreover, every reason to believe that the Federal Reserve will be an active, constructive, and positive participant in the process of paying down the US Treasury debt, including that portion of the debt held by the Federal Reserve itself.Thus, from a domestic macroeconomic perspective, the case is compelling for maximizing the pay down of Treasury securities in the hands of the public as long as short-term stabilization policies maintain a healthy growing US economy.International Economic and Financial ImplicationsThe international economic and financial implications of a prospective decline in Treasury debt outstanding are fundamentally benign. Financial market institutions and financial market participants (foreign and domestic, private and official) will adjust and are adjusting. The net result should be only a few paragraphs in international monetary and financial history, perhaps, with a few interesting footnotes. The best public policy would be to lay out a realistic trajectory for paying down the stock of Treasury debt, provide reasonable advance notice about how debt-management operations will take account of that trajectory as it evolves, and inform and consult market participants (including foreign official holders that will need to respond smoothly to changes) along the way. The key to a successful pay down of the debt will be the smoothness and predictability of the process. The "glide path" should be well prepared.We already have preliminary aggregate data on adjustments by international investors to the reduced supply of US Treasury obligations because of budget surpluses and to the pay down of that debt. These data clearly demonstrate that market institutions and foreign holders of US Treasury obligations are adjusting. These data confirm the basic conclusion of an International Monetary Fund study on this issue: "The shrinking supply of US Treasury securities has already resulted in significant changes in US and international financial markets, particularly in terms of the instruments that are used by market participants for various purposes."3 Indeed, a close reading of that study suggests that while the process of adjustment to the disappearance from the market of US Treasury securities is not yet complete, at this point it could be highly disruptive to reverse it when the market is already gearing up and changing its modi operandi.It is useful to distinguish between foreign private and foreign official holders of US financial obligations and also to recognize that, today, the former group is far more important than the latter. In 1980, foreign official authorities held 40 percent of foreign-owned assets in the United States, other than direct investment. Twenty-five percent of the total was accounted for by foreign official holdings of US Treasury securities. By contrast, by the end of 2000, foreign official authorities held less than 15 percent of all foreign-owned nondirect investment assets in the United States and less than 9 percent of the total was official holdings of US Treasury securities.4 Thus, private investors hold the bulk of all foreign financial claims on the United States, and by the end of 2000 almost 90 percent of the claims of private holders were non-Treasury instruments.Going forward, the attitudes of foreign private investors toward US financial assets and markets are much more important that the views of official holders of US Treasury securities. Their assessments of overall US economic and financial conditions, and the prudence of US economic policies, are much more important than what they may think about the potential absence of US Treasury obligations in the array of potential investment instruments. Moreover, foreign private holders of US Treasury debt behave similarly to domestic private participants in US financial markets. They adjust quite rapidly to changing market conditions. Their recent behavior with respect to Treasury securities supports this view.At the end of 2000, foreign private holdings of US Treasury securities were a slightly larger (10 percent) share of total foreign-owned financial assets in the United States than were foreign official holdings of such assets (9 percent). The private share had risen from only 3.5 percent of total foreign-owned financial assets in the United States in 1980, but the share was declining. In 1999, foreign private holders sold (net) $20 billion of Treasury securities; they purchased $331 billion of all other US securities. Last year, net sales of Treasuries rose to $52 billion; at the same time, purchases of all other US securities rose to $466 billion, as the US current account deficit widened further.Market institutions and market participants adjust- and already are adjusting-to changes in the economic and financial environment, including the reality and the prospect of a substantially reduced availability of US Treasury obligations. The share of Treasuries in total foreign private holdings declined from 17 percent in 1997 to only 11 percent by the end of 2000.Between 1997 and 2000, foreign private holdings of financial claims on the United States (total foreign private assets in the United States less direct investment claims) rose by an estimated $1.7 trillion. Over the same period, foreign private holdings of Treasuries declined by about $20 billion. Foreign private investors added about $1.4 trillion to their holdings of US stocks and bonds, $191 billion to their claims on US banking organizations, $136 billion to their claims on nonbanking organizations, and $40 billion to their holdings of US currency. Thus the share of Treasuries in total foreign private holdings declined from 17 percent in 1997 to only 11 percent by the end of 2000.In other words, what if the $1.7 trillion addition to foreign private financial assets in the United States over the past three years had been allocated to investments in the same share as the stock of $3.9 trillion was allocated at the end of 1997? The answer is that 17 percent would have gone into Treasuries for an increase of $295 billion. That amount plus the $22 billion reduction in holdings of Treasuries that actually occurred, or a total of $317 billion, is measure of the dramatic reallocation of foreign private investment funds toward private US assets and a substitution away from Treasuries.5Markets are adjusting to the reduced availability of US Treasury securities, and foreign private investors in US financial assets are adjusting right along with them without any pronounced effects on interest rates or exchange rates.It is instructive to note that the Treasury announcement on 14 November 2000 did not produce even a ripple of reaction in the US government debt market or in foreign exchange markets, nor was there any reaction when the new policy was implemented in early February 2001.Foreign official holders of Treasury securities, on the other hand, normally are slower to adjust to changing financial conditions because profit maximization is generally not their paramount motivation. However, monetary authorities are not insensitive to changes in relative rates of return and the liquidity of their assets. Moreover, they tend to favor shorter-maturity obligations, and thus they will tend to be affected later by any growing scarcity of Treasury debt. A reasonable estimate is that no more than 5 percent of the roughly $575 billion in foreign official holdings of US Treasuries at the end of 2000 had a remaining maturity of more than 10 years.6 In other words, in evaluating, as I do below, the overall willingness of foreign holders of Treasuries to participate in the buyback program or a potential exchange program, official holders are not quantitatively significant even if, contrary to any reasonable assumption, they do not participate at all.Foreign official holdings of US Treasury securities have declined slightly since the end of 1996. They have risen as a share of the shrinking total stock of publicly held Treasury securities but as a share of total foreign official assets in the United States they have declined. Between the end of 1997 and the end of 2000, total foreign official claims on the United States rose almost $90 billion, while their holdings of Treasuries declined $9 billion, from 71 percent of their total portfolio to 63 percent. Holdings of "other US government securities" (principally debt securities of US government corporations and agencies) rose $70 billion over this period and holdings of "other assets" (principally bonds and stocks) rose $28 billion. Over the same three-year period, if the share of Treasuries in foreign official assets in the United States had remained at the 1997 level (71 percent), holdings of Treasuries would have risen $63 billion instead of declining $9 billion.7Foreign official holders also are adjusting to the reduced supply of Treasuries, responding to changing market conditions, and substituting away from Treasuries.Late last year, the US Treasury took steps to encourage and facilitate the education and adjustment process for foreign official holders to the prospect of a reduced supply of Treasury debt. In mid-November, the Treasury announced that as of February 1, 2001, FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authority) account participants in Treasury auctions would be limited in the amounts they could roll-over and add-on to Treasury auctions via noncompetitive tenders. The effect of this change is to channel a limited number of large purchases by foreign official investors into the open market. This change has two important implications. First, it adds to the liquidity of primary and secondary markets by increasing volume. Second, in part as a consequence of the extensive consultations in advance of the announcement, the change has helped to sensitize foreign official holders to think well in advance about their investment strategies in a world where there will be a dwindling amount of US Treasury debt. It is instructive to note that the Treasury announcement on 14 November 2000 did not produce even a ripple of reaction in the US government debt market or in foreign exchange markets, nor was there any reaction when the new policy was implemented in early February 2001.In this connection, it is highly desirable that the status of the government-sponsored enterprises and of their debt obligations is clearly established because of the potential for the obligations of these entities to be treated as close substitutes for US Treasury securities with a de facto official guarantee.8 The first-best policy would be for Congress to pass appropriate legislation regarding the regulation, supervision, and transparency of these entities and clarify the status of their liabilities. It is noteworthy that for statistical purposes the Commerce Department report foreign purchases of their debt instruments as "other US government securities." Under these circumstances, it is hardly surprising that foreign investors view them as differing little from US Treasury securities, and the Commerce Department would be well advised to review its presentation or these data. Absent such legislation, the US monetary authorities should conduct an aggressive educational campaign to address the potential moral hazard issues involved in this view of these securities. This campaign should focus on foreign monetary authorities because too many of them operate in domestic environments where government guarantees are both implicit, and frequently and successfully implemented.Repayment of US Treasury Obligations Prior to MaturityIn a few cases, foreign central banks face legal restrictions with respect to the assets, including assets denominated in foreign currencies, that they hold as the counterpart of their monetary liabilities (largely currency). Most already invest in a broad range of dollar-denominated assets in addition to Treasury debt. As with the Federal Reserve, some may need to seek new legal authority to invest in acceptable substitutes in the future, but the amounts involved are not likely to be quantitatively significant.Japan is the largest official holder of US Treasury debt by a large margin, but in the Japanese case, the principal holder is not the central bank but the finance ministry and finance ministries typically have much greater discretion in this regard.Notwithstanding the broad range of US dollar obligations held by foreigners (private as well as official), some may be reluctant to participate in US Treasury buyback or exchange programs for reasons of inertia or extreme risk aversion. However, the bulk of foreign investors do not fall in that category. It is more reasonable to assume that foreign investors' preferences lie along a continuum with respect to how they view the trade-off between risk and return. Some foreign investors respond quickly to marginal changes in market conditions. Others may adjust more slowly. However, rapid adjustment is not required to accomplish smoothly a substantial pay down of US Treasury debt over the next 10 years, including through buybacks or exchanges for securities that mature after 2011.Although there may be differences of opinion on this point, the US government's being a large-scale issuer of a safe-haven asset provides no overriding economic benefit to the US economy as a whole.Ex ante, the issue of judging the overall willingness to participate in programs to facilitate early repayment of Treasury debt rests on experience and analysis. To date, experience has been positive. In particular, foreign holders have not complained. That trend should be expected to continue. In the end, the facts will speak for themselves, but I see no a priori reason to presume that the recent buyback program will not continue smoothly and inexpensively. Moreover, buyback operations are small; they can be fine-tuned as Treasury gains further experience.With respect to foreign holders of longer-maturity Treasury debt (maturing after 2011), the most reasonable assumption is that their behavior is the same on average as that of all other investors. However, it is useful to consider the potential magnitudes involved.9 As noted above, assuming that no more than 5 percent of total foreign official holdings of US Treasury obligations are invested in instruments maturing after 2011, the amount would be less than $30 billion.Assuming that maturity distribution of foreign private holdings of Treasuries is the same as the outstanding stock of marketable Treasury debt currently in the hands of the domestic and foreign private sector (i.e., excluding the Federal Reserve and foreign official holders), the share of their Treasuries maturing after 2011 would be about 22 percent, or $140 billion. This leaves a great deal (about $320 billion) to be bought back from domestic holders even if foreign holders were completely unwilling to have their holdings retired in advance, which would be an extreme assumption, unsupported by the evidence or common sense.10 The data presented earlier on recent adjustments of foreign private and official investors in US financial assets demonstrate that they already are adjusting quite rapidly to the reduced supply of Treasuries and substituting away from Treasuries as they expand their portfolios.In addition, it is highly likely that foreign private holders disproportionately prefer shorter-maturity Treasury debt, as in the case of foreign official holders, because of the interaction of foreign exchange and liquidity risk; in other words, the share of longer-maturity Treasuries in their aggregate portfolios is probably considerably less than 22 percent. Moreover, as Treasuries become scarcer, their liquidity declines, and foreign as well as domestic holders of Treasuries should welcome opportunities to liquidate their holdings by selling them to the Treasury. The central point is that foreign holders of Treasuries on average are not likely to be disproportionately reluctant to participate in buyback programs. Their risk-reward trade-offs are the same as for all other holders. They respond to similar market-based incentives.Impact on the DollarSome may argue that paying down publicly held Treasury debt will adversely affect the dollar, that is, dollar exchange rates could come under intense downward pressure because the supply of risk-free, liquid Treasury debt will dry up. Such an event is not likely, especially if the US economy stays strong and US economic and financial policies remain prudent and responsible. My reasoning is as follows.First, because paying down Treasury debt in the hands of the public is good for the US economy, it will be good for the dollar. Economic theory predicts that, to the extent that a relative increase in the productivity of the US economy is the fundamental force producing a capacity to contemplate a program of paying down Treasury debt, we should witness, first, an appreciation of the dollar to accommodate the increased imports needed to support faster expansion and, later, a depreciation to facilitate the sale of an increased supply of goods and services.11 However, neither of these movements, if they occur and are not masked by other contemporaneous developments, should be associated with anything like a crisis of confidence in the dollar-quite the reverse. The dollar would merely be responding to economic forces.The largest international risk with respect to paying down the debt is that a failure to carry it through undermines international confidence in US economic and financial policies (specifically hard-won achievements in eliminating fiscal deficits and sustaining that record of fiscal rectitude for several years), and reduces national saving in the face of a growing current account deficit.Second, what about the effects of changes in interest rates on the dollar? If one accepts the productivity story, underlying US real interest rates should rise initially and ceteris paribus the dollar would be expected to appreciate. However, as the debt is paid down with the proceeds of increased tax revenues and the influence of higher US productivity is manifested in an increased supply of goods and services, US interest rates should decline across the board, which ceteris paribus would tend to depress the dollar. There is nothing to suggest that this channel should produce a collapse in the dollar. Quite the reverse: less US government debt, higher investment, a larger capital stock, and a more productive US economy would tend to enhance the overall attractiveness of US assets over the longer term.Third, will not the dollar be adversely affected by a reduced attractiveness of dollar-denominated assets and less liquidity in US financial markets? As argued earlier, because the processes and policies (macro and micro) associated with paying down the stock of US Treasury obligations are good for the US economy, they should be good for US financial markets, which can and do adjust, and for the attractiveness of investing in dollar-denominated assets in US financial markets. In this connection, I see no merit, especially from an international perspective, in preserving the Treasury market while continuing to run substantial budget surpluses, for example, by investing excess budget revenues in private assets instead of paying off Treasury debt in the hands of the public.12Fourth, in the absence of an available stock of US government obligations at a time of international financial crisis, will not the dollar's role as a safe-haven currency be adversely affected? Although there may be differences of opinion on this point, the US government's being a large-scale issuer of a safe-haven asset provides no overriding economic benefit to the US economy as a whole. The availability of Treasuries is a convenience for market participants but money flows into and then out of such assets with little lasting net effect on the real economy. The Treasury market provides a positive externality but it is not a public good in the sense that there is a demonstrated case that there is an inadequate supply of riskless or low-risk assets.13Moreover, in recent times of crisis the dollar has not been systematically boosted by safe-haven considerations. International flights to quality in the form of US Treasury obligations, to the extent that they have occurred in recent years, have not been manifested in significant dollar appreciation. Perhaps, the increased availability and use of derivatives helps explain this pattern.More broadly, the national and global financial systems have not just one type of asset but also a number of potential safe-haven (risk-less or low-risk) assets to which to fly at times of stress. Again, markets adjust to changing circumstances.14 They have time to adjust to the substantial elimination of US Treasury debt as a potential safe-haven asset but once the stock gets down to the irreducible minimum, whatever that figure proves to be, the availability of a few $100 billion more or less of Treasuries will make little difference.Finally, what about the effects on the dollar of paying down Treasury debt operating through the channel of the US current account deficit?If the evolution of the US fiscal position permits a substantial pay down of Treasury debt, that implies a further increase in US government savings, which should contribute to a rise in US savings relative to US investment. A reduction in the savings-investment imbalance would be mirrored in the narrowing of the current account deficit, perhaps, through the mechanism of the increased price-competitiveness of US goods and services, possibly associated with some depreciation of the dollar. On the other hand, recent experience has been that the positive swing in the US fiscal position and the associated increase in the overall US savings rate have been more than matched by an increase in US investment, and the current account deficit has widened.Alternatively, if we do not pay down the debt, and instead divert increased fiscal resources to increased public or private expenditure, thus reducing national savings, conventional analysis suggests that the dollar would appreciate and the current account deficit would widen further. However, conventional analysis may again be incomplete and misleading; the dollar might, in fact, depreciate, perhaps because of a loss of confidence in the orientation of US economic policies and a further widening of the current account deficit. In my view, this is the principal international risk with respect to paying down Treasury debt: our failure to do so will undermine the strength of the US economy and confidence in US economic and financial policies.ConclusionIf US economic and political developments produce a substantial pay down of publicly held US Treasury debt, and that process is well prepared, the pay down will have positive consequences for US economic performance. Paying down the debt should have benign international economic and financial implications. Market institutions and participants are already adjusting to the reality and the prospect of a substantially reduced availability of US Treasury obligations by shifting toward liabilities of the US private sector. Market institutions are adjusting as well. Foreign holders do not present unique obstacles to programs directed at paying down Treasury's publicly held debt prior to maturity on reasonable terms. At present, the largest international risk is that a failure to carry through on the realistic prospect of paying down US Treasury debt at some point contributes to a disorderly collapse of the dollar on foreign exchange markets because that failure reduces national savings and undermines confidence in US fiscal policy. 
Notes
1. Alan Greenspan, testimony before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate, 25 January 2001.2. Alan Greenspan, testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US House of Representatives, 13 February 2001.3. Garry J. Schinasi, Charles F. Kramer, and R. Todd Smith, Financial Implications of the Shrinking Supply of U.S. Treasury Securities, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., 20 March 2001.4. The Commerce Department has not yet released estimates of the US international investment position for the end of 2000. The data cited in the text are constructed from the stock estimate for the end of 1999 plus transactions recorded in 2000, exclusive of valuation adjustments, except for data on holdings of Treasury securities as of the end of 2000, which include valuation adjustments.5. A similar exercise involves looking at only the allocation of estimated earnings on the holdings of Treasuries at the end of 1997; if investors had earned over the past three years a total of 15 percent on the end 1997 stock of $662 billion and reinvested the resulting earnings in Treasuries, holdings would have gone up $99 billion rather than down more than $20 billion.6. This estimate is based on data on net foreign "roll-overs" and "add-ons" at Treasury auctions during the last two years, in which the share of 10-year and 30-year obligations averaged 3.2 percent.7. Looked at from the somewhat broader perspective of total foreign exchange reserves in dollars held either in the United States or elsewhere, and assuming that the dollar's share of total foreign exchange holdings in 2000 was the same as in 1997 (about 60 percent), that total rose by more than $200 billion over three years. The share of Treasuries in the total declined from 60 percent to 49 percent. If the $200-billion increase in foreign official dollar reserves over the three-year period had been allocated to investments in the assumed 60 percent share that prevailed at the end of 1997, $120 billion would have gone into Treasuries compared with the actual decline of $9 billion. In fact, the latest estimates by the IMF show that the dollar's share in global foreign exchange reserves rose from 62.1 percent in 1997 to 66.2 percent in 1999. International Monetary Fund, 2000 Annual Report, 109.8. Securities of government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) such as the Federal National Mortgage Association trade at a relatively narrow spread to US Treasury securities. Recently those spreads have been close to 50 basis points for two-year notes and somewhat wider for longer-maturity instruments.9. Benchmark data on the maturity structure of foreign private and official holdings of US Treasury securities for end-1994, and soon for March 2000, are available to the Treasury, but have not been published.10. Gary Gensler, former Treasury undersecretary for domestic finance, in testimony before Committee on Finance of the US Senate on 29 March 2001, estimated that "Treasury could smoothly retire one-half, and possibly up to two-thirds, of its current long-term marketable debt in private hands over the next 10 years" of which $460 billion matures after 2011.11. An alternative story is that the recent acceleration of labor productivity in the United States has disproportionately affected traded goods industries and distorted the terms of trade between traded and nontraded goods in the United States, requiring a subsequent adjustment via currency depreciation.12. Technically, the purchase of private assets is a fourth option for use of projected substantial federal budget surpluses over the next 10 years.13. Theoretically, the presence of a riskless asset encourages risk taking by allowing, through diversification, a reduction in the overall risk in a portfolio. In the case of the Treasury market, there are close substitutes. Diverting flows of funds into the Treasury market weakens banks and their role in the financial system; their assets are only slightly more risky, and with safe-haven flows of funds into banks there is only a limited price effect because banks' balance sheets are more flexible. Moreover, to the extent that the Treasury market encourages risk taking, one can ask in today's world whether it encourages too much or too little.14. Chairman Greenspan has spoken of the development of quadruple-A securities, and said on this point, "you cannot replicate the degree of risklessness in US Treasury securities fully in the private market. You can get very close." House Committee on the Budget, 2 March 2001. On 27 April 2001, addressing the Bond Market Association, he said, "I am confident that US financial markets, which are the most innovative and efficient in the world, can readily adapt to a pay-down of Treasury debt by creating private alternatives with many of the attributes that market participants value in Treasury securities."

The author is commissioner of the European Union for competition and has been a member of the European Commission since 1995. He was previously rector and then president of Bocconi University in Milan after a decade of distinguished service as professor of economics at the university. This is a slightly edited version of the presentation he made at the inauguration of the Whitman International Lecture Series, supported by the Whitman Family Foundation, at the Institute on March 30, 2001.
This policy brief presents recent examples of, and trends in, EU-US cooperation in relation to merger control, with particular emphasis on how it is facilitating an increasing convergence in our respective approaches. The brief also discusses our initiatives in the multilateral arena. I am referring to the European Commission's initiative to persuade our World Trade Organization (WTO) partners that negotiations should commence on the conclusion of a competition agreement and on the ideas for the creation of a global competition forum. I have taken note with satisfaction that the Institute for International Economics as well as other research organizations have for some time been supporters of the idea of negotiating a WTO agreement on competition policy.1
Globalization and the "Merger Boom"
The world economy has undergone profound change in recent times, as a result of which competition policy has taken on greater importance than ever before. Not only have we witnessed the remarkable spread of market capitalism to most parts of the globe but we have also seen the liberalization of many formerly monopolized and state-controlled sectors. Parallel to this worldwide economic liberalization, we have witnessed a progressive reduction in trade barriers and a dramatic increase in the volume of goods and services being traded across borders. This, in combination with remarkable technological advances, has resulted in marked interdependence among economies worldwide.
One of the principal effects
of [global] economic
developments has been a
dramatic growth in mergers in
general, and in cross-border
mergers in particular.

One of the principal effects of these economic developments has been a dramatic growth in merger activity in general, and in the number of cross-border mergers in particular. The merger boom of the 1990s has been particularly influenced by the globalization and growing integration of world financial markets, and in Europe by the advent of a single European currency. This recent merger wave is noteworthy-not only for its sheer size in terms of value and range of industries involved but also for its truly global scale. Today's global mergers go be yond the simple combination of activities in different regions of the world: they might be better described as the worldwide integration and consolidation of such activities. As a result, many of the transactions, which have taken place in recent years, have significantly modified on a global scale the fundamentals of competition in the industries concerned.
Globalization and the growth in these cross-border mergers present major challenges for competition authorities around the world and have highlighted the importance of seeking to ensure a degree of convergence and coordination among the world's competition law enforcement systems, particularly between the EU and US antitrust authorities.
Recent Developments in EU-US Cooperation in Merger Control
Over the past decade we have concluded two competition cooperation agreements with the United States: the 1991 (basic) and 1998 ("positive comity") agreements. Our experience of EU-US cooperation has been that it works very effectively, particularly in merger cases, thus substantially reducing the risk of divergent or incoherent rulings. Commission staff are in close and daily contact with their counterparts at the Antitrust Division of the US Department of Justice (US DOJ) and Federal Trade Commission (FTC). Indeed, I am proud to say that EU-US cooperation in competition/antitrust law enforcement has become something of a model for transatlantic cooperation generally.
Cooperation in merger cases has been more intensive than ever during the past year or so: an unprecedented large number of operations have been scrutinized simultaneously on both sides of the Atlantic. Interagency discussions can focus on any or all of the main issues likely to arise in the context of a merger investigation: the "definition" of markets, the likely competitive impact of a transaction on those markets, and the viability of any remedies suggested by the merging parties. Following is a more detailed insight into a number of merger investigations involving close transatlantic cooperation in recent times. This will give you a flavor of how it works in practice and of the kinds of issues that can arise.
Some Recent Examples of EU-US Cooperation in Merger Cases
In the MCI WorldCom/Sprint investigation, the cooperation between the European Commission and the US DOJ involved (with the help of waivers from the merging companies of their confidentiality rights) exchanges of, and concerning, information submitted by the merging parties. In addition, on the basis of waivers much information gleaned from third parties was also shared between the agencies. The European Union had to collect Internet traffic and revenue data from a large number of companies domiciled in the United States. This was made possible only due to the intense cooperation that took place between the Commission and the US DOJ. Such an extensive sharing of information allowed both case teams to discuss in-depth the merits of the case as well as the submissions from the merging parties and the third parties, thereby facilitating consistent assessments of the competitive impact of the transaction in the area of joint concern.
Globalization and the growth
in cross-border mergers
present major challenges for
competition authorities around
the world and highlight
the importance of seeking
to ensure a degree of convergence
and coordination among
the world's competition
law enforcement systems.

When we reached the stage of formally stating our competition concerns to MCI WorldCom and Sprint, representatives of the US DOJ attended the Commission's "oral hearing" of the merging parties' reply to our objections. Indeed, it has now become standard practice for representatives of the antitrust agencies to attend oral hearings in cases involving close EU-US cooperation-a virtually unprecedented step forward in EU-US regulatory cooperation. And during the MCI WorldCom/Sprint investigation, a representative of the Commission attended for the first time one of the so-called "pitch-meetings" (a rough equivalent of the Commission's oral hearings) that took place at the US DOJ.
Finally, we discussed at length the proposed divestiture of the Sprint Internet business. But in the face of our opposition, the parties eventually withdrew the proposal. Indeed, cooperation at the remedy stage of proceedings has become much more prominent recently. Last year, for example, in the Alcoa/Reynolds and AstraZeneca/Novartis investigations the EU and US authorities conducted parallel negotiations with the merging parties and assessed the remedies together. As a result, the risk of incompatible remedies being agreed to was avoided. In the latter case, this was particularly important because, even though the relevant geographic markets were national, the commitments had to be implemented worldwide.
Convergence in EU and US Approaches to Merger Control
Our respective rules (EU competition law and US antitrust law), while phrased in quite different language and with very different historical antecedents, are in most respects pursuing the same objectives. There has never been any attempt to harmonize those laws and yet commentators acknowledge with virtual unanimity that the application of EU and US competition law-notably in the field of merger control-has seen a marked convergence in recent times. This is an organic process and it is a trend that is very much welcome and to be encouraged, particularly in view of the increasing convergence of the world's economies.

For obvious reasons, convergence is particularly beneficial with regard to the assessment of large, transnational mergers requiring clearance on both sides of the Atlantic. Our rules prohibit mergers that lead to the creation or strengthening of a dominant position, while US law prohibits mergers where the effect "may be substantially to lessen competition, or to tend to create a monopoly." While you might think that the application of these seemingly different tests would at times lead to divergent outcomes, that has not been our experience. The main reason why we do not see such divergence, in my view, is that both the EU and US authorities are applying the same analytical framework when examining the competitive effects likely to result from a proposed merger: we share a common understanding of what the correct microeconomic analysis of these operations should be.
The MCI WorldCom/Sprint and Alcoa/Reynolds cases are good examples of substantive convergence despite different laws. In the former case, both the Commission and the US DOJ concluded that a prohibition was warranted. Regarding the latter transaction, we both agreed there were competition problems that required serious remedial action. We also agreed on the existence of a relevant worldwide geographic market with different effects being produced in the United States and in the European Community. Ultimately the most significant part of the remedy involved divestiture of one of the party's major production plants, which happened to be located neither in the European Union nor in the United States, but in Australia.
Where we do reach different conclusions about whether a particular transaction should be allowed to go ahead, this is generally because the effects of the merger are likely to be different in the two jurisdictions. Merger assessment in certain industries may be less likely to lead to similar remedies being imposed. This occurs notably when the markets have a more regional scope. For example, while major competitors in industries such as pharmaceuticals and chemicals are present throughout the world, the main competition effects in these industries have often differed between the United States and the European Union. This happened, for example, in the recent cases of AstraZeneca/Novartis and Dow Chemical/UCC, where the remedies that were fashioned by the EU and US authorities were customized to meet the specific problems identified in their respective jurisdictions.

In Air Liquide/BOC, another case where EU-US cooperation was extremely close throughout the proceedings, the geographic market was worldwide in scope. And yet the competitive effects, and as a result the remedies required, were quite different between the European Union and the United States.
This divergence occurred not because of different laws but because of different competition concerns. In the European Community, the Commission found that the "serious doubts" raised by the combination of two competitors-one with a dominant position in France, and the other with a dominant position in the United Kingdom-could be resolved by a remedy requiring BOC's divestiture of its 25 percent share in the UK market, thereby immediately introducing a new competitor to outweigh the loss of potential competition. In the United States, however, the issue was one of elimination of actual, not potential, competition-and the consequent reduction of players from four to three in a highly concentrated market. As a result, the type of remedy that was found satisfactory in the European Union was not considered to be adequate in the United States. Consequently, the US FTC sought to impose stricter measures-measures that the parties found so burdensome that they abandoned the deal entirely. So, a deal that was authorized in the European Union subject to very substantial commitments fell apart in the United States in the face of strong FTC opposition.
To address the potential competition
problems posed by mergers
in oligopolistic markets,
it is necessary to develop a concept
of collective dominance,
without which it would be
impossible to challenge a merger
that would result in the creation
of a global oligopoly.

Where cases may produce differing competitive impacts on the two sides of the Atlantic, what is important is to ensure that companies are not harmed by the two parallel investigations and remedies. This is what we tried to avoid when, in the Exxon/Mobil case, we accepted that, if another jurisdiction imposed remedies that were incompatible with those negotiated with the European Commission, the parties could come to the Commission and request that the incongruity be removed. Of course, any alteration would, to the greatest extent possible, have to be in keeping with the competition goals of the remedies originally agreed upon.
Procedural Differences Have to Be Lived With
The principal differences between the EU and US merger evaluation processes are procedural rather than substantive. While our competition analyses are increasingly convergent, it is true that our procedures-and particularly our time limits-do differ to some extent. This can lead to some practical difficulties, though not insurmountable ones, in that one jurisdiction (and very often the European Union, given our strict deadlines) has to make a decision first. There are calls for some international harmonization of procedures and I recognize that those calls-objectively speaking-do have some merit. At the same time, we must be realistic in our ambitions: our procedural differences reflect, to a large extent, different legal and administrative cultures-these are not things that can be changed overnight.
Policy Dialogue as a Facilitator of Convergence
Close dialogue and cooperation between the Commission and the US antitrust authorities (the DOJ and FTC) has made a substantial contribution to the trend toward convergence. Indeed, it is a sine qua non for any really effective and substantial cooperation in antitrust enforcement that the authorities see more or less eye to eye on how to assess and deal with similar competition problems.
There are always things that we can do better-I am very conscious of this. But we are constantly seeking to reduce the scope for differences between us. For example, just over a year ago, we (Commission/DOJ/FTC) agreed that a transatlantic working group should be set up to seek further EU-US convergence on two crucial aspects of merger control: first, our approaches toward the identification and implementation of remedies (in particular, divestitures) and post-merger compliance-monitoring; and, second, our analytical approaches toward oligopolistic/collective dominance or "coordinated interaction" as it is termed in the United States.
To date, this working group has been focusing its energies primarily on remedies. These discussions have proved very useful to us-and I think to the US agencies also. The working group will soon shift its attention toward the issue of oligopoly in merger control, a subject that is pointed by some commentators

as one where the European Union and the United States sometimes take different approaches. The phenomenon of oligopolistic dominance is, in my view, of particular pertinence in the examination of global markets. While a finding of single firm dominance is in most instances unlikely in such markets, these markets can often be characterized by the presence of a small number of globally active companies. Such a market structure can be the result of a wave of concentration in a particular sector, such as the one that has recently occurred in the oil industry. In order to be able to address-in the merger control context-the potential competition problems that may arise in such oligopolistic markets, it is necessary to develop a concept of collective dominance; such a concept is now well established in EC law.
A global competition forum
is not being proposed as an
alternative to a WTO multilateral
competition law framework.
The two should be regarded
as complementary.

One example, I think, clearly illustrates the importance of the concept: in world markets, characterized by the presence of a small number of global players, potential entry by firms in neighboring geographic markets is by definition impossible. Without a concept of collective dominance, it would not be possible to challenge a merger that would result in the creation of a global oligopoly of this kind.
This pooling of ideas is a mutually beneficial exercise and I think it represents an important aspect of our efforts toward ensuring a more convergent analysis of the impact of cross-border mergers on the two sides of the Atlantic.
Multilateral/Plurilateral Initiatives
The European Union has recognized, for some time, that bilateral cooperation has its limitations: we cannot realistically expect to build the same intensive cooperative relationship that we have with the United States, with all of our counterparts around the world-the price, in terms of expenditure of scarce administrative resources, would simply be too high. It is therefore time, in my view, to intensify the pursuit of multilateral and plurilateral solutions.
A WTO Competition Agreement
I am convinced of the need to put in place a WTO framework agreement ensuring the respect of certain basic competition principles. The Commission (with the whole-hearted support of all the member states of the European Union) has been the principal advocate of such an initiative and has, through deliberations of the WTO Working Group on Trade and Competition, been attempting to persuade member countries of its merits. We are convinced that a framework agreement would serve to underpin the impressive progress that has been made in trade liberalization over the past few decades, by ensuring that governmental barriers to trade are not replaced by private ones that have the same effect.
A WTO agreement on competition would be firmly premised on a commitment by member countries to have in place, and to enforce, domestic competition laws. The European Union is suggesting that these laws be based on "core principles" reflecting what we believe already represents a consensus among WTO members: the principles consist of a set of systemic guarantees, coupled with a commitment to outlaw the most economically harmful forms of anticompetitive behavior.

Regarding systemic guarantees, one is the fundamental WTO principle of nondiscrimination, meaning that domestic laws should not discriminate against firms on the basis of their "nationality". In addition, we believe the principle of transparency should apply: competition laws and regulations should be publicized, including any exclusions or exceptions, thereby enabling firms to familiarize themselves with the applicable law. Finally, enforcement should respect the "due process" of law, including the opportunity for those being investigated to put their case to the authorities before a decision is made, as well as the right to appeal such decisions to another body, be it administrative or judicial.
Regarding substantive commitments, the European Union is proposing that all WTO members should outlaw cartels. We are convinced that this reflects a common view among members, not just among developed countries but in the developing world as well, as to the economic harm that such behavior engenders. Building consensus about the need to regulate other anticompetitive practices will be an ongoing process and the WTO agreement would evolve to accommodate such common views.
But I should be clear about one thing: in calling for a WTO agreement, we are not seeking to establish by stealth a global competition authority, which would erode the sovereignty of national authorities. On the contrary, strong national enforcement agencies are indispensable to the success of a framework agreement. Nor is the European Union proposing a harmonization of substantive competition laws or that individual decisions of national competition authorities should be subject to dispute settlement under the WTO.
I am very hopeful that we can convince our trading partners-and not least the United States-of the importance of this initiative and that substantive negotiations can be undertaken as part of the next trade round which, I hope, will be launched at Qatar in November 2001.
A Global Competition Forum
There has been considerable talk over the last year or so about the idea of creating some kind of a broad-based global forum for the discussion of competition policy issues generally. I am an enthusiastic proponent of the idea. As I explained during a speech I gave at the European University Institute in October 2000, I am convinced that the creation of such a forum would meet the need to put in place a focal point for discussion between those responsible for the development and management of competition policy worldwide. There are today over 80 countries that have enacted some form of competition law regime, many of which have only been introduced during the past decade-and more are in the pipeline.
There is a clear need for a place where the whole range of competition policy issues-substantive, systemic and enforcement-related-can be debated. The end-objective should be to achieve a maximum of convergence and consensus between participants through dialogue, and an exchange of experiences on enforcement policy and practice.
Earlier this year, I joined a number of like-minded senior competition law officials and professionals at an informal gathering for the first "brainstorming" to discuss how we should go about launching what has become known as the "Global Competition Forum".
Calling for a WTO agreement
does not mean establishing
by stealth a global
competition authority
that would erode the sovereignty
of national authorities.

We agreed that the forum should not be a new international institution and that it should involve a minimum of permanent infrastructure, with support primarily provided by its participants. It should be first and foremost a competition authority forum but would draw together all interested parties-both public (e.g., other international organizations) and private (e.g., business, professional, consumer and academic or research bodies), who could all be appropriately associated with the forum as participants and "facilitators". The support of facilitators could take a variety of forms including the provision of venues for discussion or of technical expertise; the International Bar Association has already generously provided its services to the development of the initiative.
I know that many will ask: but aren't we already committed to pursuing multilateralism in competition policy in the next trade round? Wouldn't this initiative risk to undermine those efforts? So let me be clear about this: the forum is not being proposed as an alternative to a multilateral competition law framework at the WTO. Rather, the two should be regarded as complementary. As I have just explained, our WTO initiative is currently aimed at putting in place a set of basic systemic guarantees, coupled with certain minimum substantive requirements, that would be binding on member countries. The European Union believes that this agenda reflects an existing consensus about what should be the central features of a sound competition policy. The work of the global forum will, in my view, reinforce that consensus and extend it to other aspects of competition policy. So the two avenues can be followed in parallel and be mutually reinforcing in their pursuit of the same ultimate competition policy objectives.
Developing Countries to Benefit from These Multilateral Initiatives
The global forum, and indeed a WTO competition agreement, will-in my view-be of particular benefit to developing countries. Closed and nontransparent markets, and the absence of effective competition between enterprises, are obstacles to economic growth in much of the developing world. The pursuit of a robust competition policy by developing countries should be an important ingredient in any economic reforms designed to promote growth: it encourages industrial competitiveness by rewarding efficiency and innovation, thereby fostering investment.
The fact that many developing countries are still in the process of developing a competition law framework renders the advent of the forum-and, in due course, of a WTO competition agreement-all the more timely: this would help ensure that new competition regimes are based on commonly agreed principles and that developing countries can benefit from the experience acquired by other countries in the establishment of effective enforcement structures. Moreover, these initiatives will ensure that competition authorities in developing countries benefit from enhanced international cooperation, including the provision of technical assistance.
Notes
1. See Global Competition Policy, Edward M. Graham and J. David Richardson, eds. Washington: Institute for International Economics. December 1997.

Kimberly Ann Elliott is a research fellow at the Institute for International Economics. She is the editor of Corruption and the Global Economy (1997), and a coauthor of Economic Sanctions Reconsidered, 3rd Edition (forthcoming 2003).
[See Related Brief: 00-6]
With the impasse over whether and how to link labor standards and trade agreements stretching into its eighth year, attention has turned to "monetary assessments," or fines, as alternatives to trade sanctions. In testimony before the House Ways and Means Committee in early March 2001, US Trade Representative Robert Zoellick suggested that fines would be worth considering.1 Both the North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation (NAALC) under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and a similar agreement accompanying the Canada-Chile free trade agreement provide for fines to address a "persistent pattern of failure" by a member country to enforce its own labor laws.
Fines have the advantage of adding "teeth" to agreements on labor standards without impeding trade and, based on Mexican and Chilean acceptance of the idea, may be more palatable to developing countries than trade measures. Fines may therefore at least partially solve the impasse created by the trade-labor linkage debate. Unless such mechanisms are carefully designed, however, they may do little to improve working conditions. This policy brief tries to illuminate the issues involved in designing an effective system of fines to promote adequate enforcement of labor laws. It first summarizes the two existing agreements, and then analyzes the likely effects of various alternative approaches, beginning with three key questions:
Who will pay the fine (and who really pays-i.e., what is the incidence of the fine)?
What happens with the revenue collected? If devoted to improved enforcement, who administers it? Should it be the agency that previously failed to adequately enforce the law?
How is collection ultimately enforced? By suspension of trade benefits, as for the United States and Mexico under the NAFTA agreement? By national courts, as under the Canada-Chile side agreement?
Regardless of whether fines or trade sanctions are used, however, two prior questions must be answered: (1) whether international enforcement measures will address all or only trade-related failures in national enforcement; and (2) whether the relevant standards will be based on national or international law. The first guiding principle in making these decisions should be recognition of the International Labor Organization's (ILO) core competence to enforce labor standards in general. Therefore, it is appropriate for trade agreements to focus narrowly on trade-related violations of labor standards while governments simultaneously strengthen the ILO's ability to promote and enforce international labor standards more generally.
Fines have the advantage of adding "teeth"
to agreements on labor standards
without impeding trade and, based
on Mexican and Chilean acceptance
of the idea, may be more palatable to
developing countries than trade measures.
Second, efforts to strengthen the global regime should be based on internationally recognized labor standards. In regional or bilateral negotiations, the question of whether standards should reach some minimum level-either set by the ILO or negotiated by the parties to the agreement-likely will be determined case by case. At a minimum, however, each party's laws should be at least broadly consistent with the ILO's "Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work," which defines the core labor standards as freedom of association, freedom from forced labor, abolition of child labor, and nondiscrimination. It would be inappropriate to agree on stronger enforcement of laws that are clearly inconsistent with international norms (e.g., China's law establishing a trade union monopoly, which infringes freedom of association). Moreover, agreeing to more vigorous enforcement of substandard laws could discourage future improvements of those laws.
The NAALC and Canada-Chile Precedents
These agreements have two broad goals: (1) to encourage improved working conditions in the region through cooperative activities; and (2) to provide a mechanism for mediating disputes over these issues.2 The focus here is on the dispute resolution mechanisms and, except for ultimate enforcement, these agreements are nearly identical in their approaches. First, they allow challenges based only on:
a "persistent pattern," not a single instance, of failure to enforce labor laws;
"mutually recognized" national labor laws, not international standards;
violations in trade-related sectors or workplaces.
In other words, these agreements respect national sovereignty in the setting of national labor laws and do not require that they either be consistent with ILO standards or reach some other minimum agreed level. The agreements also emphasize cooperation and consultation, with arbitral panels only as a last resort.
While the set of standards addressed in the agreements is broader than the core labor standards identified by the ILO, the level of enforcement that applies to each differs (see table 1). The first level, which applies to all 11 categories, allows citizens of one party to report to that country's National Administrative Office (NAO) alleged enforcement problems in one of the other parties. If the NAO agrees there is a potential problem, it contacts the NAO in the partner country and if those consultations do not resolve the problem it may request ministerial consultations. If that is still not sufficient, an experts' committee may be appointed to evaluate problems in certain areas and, if appropriate, to offer "practical recommendations" to be considered by the joint Commission for Labor Cooperation (CLC).
Fines can contribute to improved
working conditions in two ways:
(1) by deterring or punishing violators
and thereby changing behavior;
or (2) by redirecting resources
to address enforcement problems.
If the dispute is still not resolved after ministerial consultations and an expert evaluation, an arbitral panel may be appointed to determine whether a persistent failure to enforce designated labor laws exists and, if necessary, to review implementation of remedial actions and to impose a "monetary enforcement assessment."3 Under the NAALC, fines are capped at 0.007 percent of total trade in goods between the parties to the dispute, which in 2000 would have been fines of just under $20 million for the United States and Mexico and nearly $30 million for the United States and Canada. In the Canada-Chile agreement, fines are capped at US$10 million. The assessments are supposed to consider the pervasiveness and duration of the failure to enforce labor laws , the resource constraints, and the efforts by the party to remedy the problem since the final report was issued. The fines "shall be paid in the currency of the Party complained against into a fund established [by the CLC] and shall be expended at the direction of the Council to improve or enhance the labor law enforcement in the Party complained against, consistent with its law." The agreements do not say who should administer these expenditures to ensure that improvements follow.
Finally, as noted above, a failure by either Mexico or the United States to pay fines levied under this mechanism could lead to suspension of preferential tariff cuts under the NAFTA agreement, but only to the extent necessary to collect the value of the monetary assessment levied by the arbitral panel. Canada adamantly opposed trade sanctions to enforce the side agreements on both labor and environment (despite broadly agreeing with the objectives of the agreements) and complaints can only be enforced through the courts, not via the suspension of benefits. The provisions for judicial enforcement were extended to Chile in the bilateral agreement.4
Of the eleven categories of labor law listed in the agreements, in only three cases-involving minimum wages, child labor, and occupational health and safety-can fines be imposed. Of these, only the eventual elimination of child labor is a "core" labor standard; the fundamental rights of freedom from forced labor and nondiscrimination are subject only to evaluation by an experts' committee. Enforcement of the most important "enabling standards"-freedom of association and the right to bargain collectively-are not even subject to evaluation by an expert committee. Despite that, restrictions on freedom of association have been the most common reason for submissions to the US NAO, usually against Mexico, but also twice against Canada. Three of five submissions to the Mexican NAO have addressed problems in the United States with respect to treatment of migrant labor, one of which was also raised in Canada. Several joint technical seminars on labor law have been held between Canada and Chile under their bilateral agreement but there have as yet been no submissions to either National Secretariat (the equivalent of the NAOs under the NAFTA) complaining of inadequate enforcement.
The approaches taken under the
North American and Canada-Chile
labor cooperation agreements are
modestly useful but limited in their
reach, underscoring the political
sensitivity of these issues. They do
not require that national laws be
consistent with broadly accepted
core labor standards.
In sum, the approaches taken under the North American and Canada-Chile labor cooperation agreements are modestly useful but limited in their reach, underscoring the political sensitivity of these issues. They do not require that national laws be consistent with broadly accepted core labor standards. Concrete penalties for poor enforcement are restricted to areas where problems are either unlikely to occur or where superficial improvements can be relatively easily implemented. For example, most research suggests that wages in export industries and firms tend to be higher than local minimum wages, though failure to pay overtime may be more common. Child labor is also not thought to be a major problem in Latin America, though underage girls are repeatedly found in apparel sweatshops. And compliance with occupational health and safety laws, such as inadequate lighting or ventilation, can often be achieved relatively easily, at least for as long as the spotlight is on a firm. In the absence of better worker-management relations, however, improvements are likely to be fragile.
Evaluating the Options for Enforcing Labor Standards Agreements
with Fines
Fines can contribute to improved working conditions in two ways: (1) by deterring or punishing violators and thereby changing behavior; or (2) by redirecting resources to address enforcement problems. The two agreements summarized above attempt to do both but are unclear on exactly how the latter objective would be achieved. Various alternatives are summarized in table 2. Depending on the circumstances and which of the two broad objectives is emphasized, the options in each column could be mixed and matched in a Chinese menu approach to building an incentives mechanism to improve compliance with labor standards. Alternatives applied to date by the two existing agreements are summarized in table 3.
A punitive approach is most appropriate when violations are due to a lack of will rather than a lack of capacity. But inadequate capacity to enforce labor laws is often at least part of the problem and imposing fines subtracts resources from a process that is likely to be already inadequately funded and supported. Both to avoid this problem and to target the penalty on the guilty party, there have been proposals that require the country's government to ensure that the fine is passed on to the firm found to be violating the law. But punishing violators is the role of the national enforcing agency. A complaints process could be useful in bringing violations to the attention of the national government, but if there is "adequate governmental enforcement" the application of penalties against the firm should follow from national law and an international fine should not be necessary.5
Moreover, note that the NAFTA and Canada-Chile agreements address only a "persistent pattern" of failure to enforce labor laws. This is an appropriate standard for transnational agreements, which neither can nor should try to replace national enforcement case by case. In these cases, it is appropriate to target the government for its failure to enforce its laws as agreed and to impose a fine that would be larger than what would typically be imposed against a single firm.
If the fine is assessed against the relevant administering agency, it could directly exacerbate an existing resource constraint. The money could be redirected to a particular enforcement problem but this would not result in a net increase in resources and therefore, enforcement problems are likely to arise in other areas. In that case, the ultimate cost of the fine is borne by workers in other, probably nontrade sectors, who will experience less enforcement and worse conditions. If the failure to enforce is because of lack of interest at the top of government, a large enough fine could be useful to induce increased effort in labor law enforcement. Requiring the national government to pay the fine out of general revenues and then transfer it to the relevant agency with oversight by an transnational body could provide a useful boost in resources, though only temporarily unless a broader budget realignment results. This could lead to a net gain in national welfare if excess military or other unproductive spending is reduced to pay for the increase in labor law enforcement.
Often, however, inadequate budgets are compounded by a broader lack of capacity or, worse, by corruption in the relevant agency. Simply transferring funds to an agency that is already not doing its job adequately may not do much good. Involving the ILO could provide a more effective solution, ensuring that the money is directed to training and technical assistance that could improve labor standards enforcement more generally and for more workers. This proposal is consistent with Article 10 of the ILO Constitution, which requires the International Labor Office to "accord to governments at their request all appropriate assistance within its power to improve labor law and its administration." ILO involvement, however, obviously depends on the law in question being at least broadly consistent with international standards. If adapted widely, this proposal would also likely require additional resources and strengthened capacity in the ILO.
Involving the International Labor
Organization could provide a more
effective solution, ensuring that the
money is directed to training and
technical assistance that could improve
labor standards enforcement more
generally and for more workers.
Some have also suggested that arbitral panels like those authorized by the NAALC should be "set up in the ILO."6 But the ILO has only limited authority to review compliance with standards unless the country in question has ratified the relevant convention. Moreover, the ILO already has elaborate procedures for monitoring and enforcing labor standards, which need to be streamlined and better supported, and it is not clear that creating a parallel process to enforce labor agreements linked to trade agreements would be a wise use of resources.7 The relevant question is whether fines would be a useful tool to add to the existing ILO toolbox.
Finally, there is the question of how to enforce collection of the fines. Relying on domestic courts, as in the Canada-Chile agreement, assumes that parties to the agreement have well-functioning judicial systems. Unfortunately, that is not currently the case in many developing countries. One reason that countries prefer trade measures to enforce trade and other international agreements is that they retain ultimate control. When it is left entirely in the hands of the government against which a complaint is brought, enforcement ultimately depends on the goodwill and commitment of the parties to the agreement.
Conclusions and Recommendations
In sum, internationally agreed fines could be useful in bolstering enforcement of labor standards if appropriately designed. Increased scrutiny and international consultation procedures, combined with the threat of a fine is likely to be sufficient in most cases to trigger stronger national enforcement, including fines against scofflaw firms as provided under national labor laws. If the threat is not sufficient, the actual imposition of fines should serve as a mechanism to redirect resources to strengthen national capacity to enforce labor laws. The analysis here suggests that trade agreements incorporating such fines, without any link to trade measures, would be most appropriate when:
the labor laws of the parties are broadly consistent with international norms,
the parties have well-functioning judicial systems, and
the ILO can be brought in to provide training and assistance.
As noted, it might also be useful to encourage the ILO to consider the use of fines to strengthen enforcement of ILO conventions. But the problems of ensuring payment and resource constraints in poor countries would obviously have to be addressed.
Table 1: Standards and levels of enforcement in the North American and Canada-Chile labor cooperation agreements
Labor standard
Subject to NAO review and ministerial consultations
Subject to Evaluation Committee of Experts
Subject to arbitral panels and fines


Freedom of association and right to organize

***

 
 
Right to bargain collectively

***

 
 
Right to strike

***

 
 
Prohibition of forced labor

***


***

 
Protection of children

***


***


***

Minimum employment standards, including wages, overtime

***


***


***

Nondiscrimination

***


***

 
Equal pay for men and women

***


***

 
Prevention of occupational injuries and illnesses

***


***


***

Compensation for occupational injuries

***


***

 
Protection of migrant workers

***


***

 
Table 2: Options for imposing fines to enforce labor standards
Who pays the fine?
What happens to the revenues?
How is collection enforced?
Whose standards and which violations?


The national government (general revenues)

With requirement for improved enforcement:
* Transfer back to government
*Transfer to administering agency
* Transferred to ILO to provide technical assistance or monitoring

Through national courts
Existing national laws
The administering agency
By suspension of trade benefits
ILO core standards
The firm in violation of labor laws
 
All violations
Only trade-related violations
Table 3: Application of the alternatives to date
 

Who pays the fine?


What happens to the revenues?


How is collection enforced?


Whose standards and which violations?



North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation
Not specified in either
In both, Labor Cooperation Council to direct expenditure "to improve or enhance labor law enforcement," by whom not specified.
By suspension of trade benefits
In both existing national laws and only trade-related violations
Canada-Chile Agreement on Labor Cooperation
Through national courts
Notes
1. It has since been reported that Ambassador Zoellick is also interested in replacing trade sanctions in commercial disputes with fines (Financial Times, April 3, 2001, p. 6; The New York Times, April 3, 2001, A25). Since no details are yet available and it is not clear whether the proposal applies just to the US-Jordan Free Trade Agreement, or to all bilateral and regional trade agreements, or even in WTO disputes, it is not examined here.
2. For more details, see Jacqueline McFadyen, "NAFTA Supplemental Agreements: Four Year Review," Working Paper 98-4, Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 1998.
3. This process is very different from that in the US-Jordan FTA, where reports and recommendations by dispute settlement panels are not binding and parties are authorized to "take any appropriate and commensurate measure" if disputes cannot otherwise be resolved, including disputes over the enforcement of labor and environmental laws. Note, however, that the measures authorized cannot be inconsistent with either party's WTO obligations and are, therefore, limited to suspension of preferential benefits under the FTA.
4. Because of the division of responsibility for labor law between the federal government and the provinces, complaints against Canada are limited in practice because the agreement must be ratified by individual provinces before it applies to areas of labor law under their jurisdiction.
5. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and Inter-American Dialogue, "Breaking the Labor-Trade Deadlock," Carnegie Endowment Working Papers Number 17, Washington, February 2001, p. 7.
6. Sidney Weintraub, "Trade Policy Suggestions For the Quebec Summit," Issues In International Political Economy, Center for Strategic and International Studies, February 2001, Number 14.
7. On the ILO supervisory process, see Kimberly Ann Elliott, "Getting Beyond No…! Promoting Worker Rights and Trade," in Jeffrey J. Schott, ed., The WTO after Seattle; and Elliott, "The ILO and Enforcement of Core Labor Standards," Policy Brief No. 00-6, both published by the Institute for International Economics.

The author is a senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics and coeditor of Japan's Financial Crisis and its Parallels to U.S. Experience (2000) and author of Restoring Japan's Economic Growth (1998).
Japan's economic tumult during March 2001 has prompted renewed fear of an impending crisis. Mixed macroeconomic data of the past months indicate that at least a brief recession is likely. To add to the panic, Japanese Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa announced on 8 March that Japanese government finances are "very close to collapsing." The Bush-Mori summit of 19 March, and the Bank of Japan (BOJ) rate cut earlier that day, raised both hopes and skepticism that Japanese officials were preparing to address their fragile banking system. Transpacific pundits have once again begun to chant, "Ah! At last true crisis will come to Japan and force change."
It is true that the Japanese economy could benefit from structural reform and the Japanese banking system specifically needs to finally write off accumulated nonperforming loans (NPLs). The Mori government and the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP)-led coalition in the Diet have been unwilling to bear the financial consequences that writing off NPLs will have for small businesses and thus have discouraged the banks from doing so. Statements like Miyazawa's, or the reluctance of the BOJ to actually ease the problem could provoke an outflow of capital from Japan, which would raise long-term interest rates, and thus cause widespread bankruptcies. And until the week of 19 March, it appeared that both Miyazawa and BOJ Governor Masaru Hayami were intentionally engaging in brinkmanship with the Diet, the markets, and with each other to scare their respective counterparts into the desired actions. All true, and all truly mistaken policies with likely bad results for Japan, the United States, and the world economy.
The resolution of the Japanese bad loan problem is not only overdue but also remains highly doable, given Japan's rising potential growth rate and already huge private savings. What is new is that the partial reforms of the banking system undertaken to date have finally brought it to the point of no return: if write-offs of the NPLs are not undertaken by the time Japanese banks reveal their mid-FY2001 results at the end of September 2001 under the new accounting standards, or if the new accounting standards are not adhered to, money will simply leave the Japanese financial system, if not Japan altogether. If the NPLs are directly addressed before then, the Japanese economy could rebound quickly from a finite deflationary period of asset reallocation-in fact, there would be room for expansionary monetary policy to offset the contraction. Given that the present choice therefore is between a controlled implosion of the Japanese banking system (with efficiency benefits) and an uncontrolled financial crisis (with international spillovers), which may leave the banking problems unaddressed or worsened, the US government has a direct interest in using its financial leverage to encourage the Japanese government to quickly take the first option.
The one structural barrier to
Japan's return to growth has been
the ongoing accumulation of
nonperforming loans and the
resulting continued
undercapitalization of the banks.

Making a Crisis Deadline Out of Progress
Prior to the Nikkei sell-off of March 2001, Japan's mixed macroeconomic data and declining stock market since mid-2000 are indicative of structural reform in progress:
Banks are selling off cross-shareholdings because they believe that mark-to-market accounting will be enforced by supervisors in the fiscal year starting 1 April.
Increasing numbers of firms are going bankrupt as a result of tightening credit standards, that is lending is based on something resembling market-based criteria (even though many other failed firms' debts are still rolled-over, adding to NPLs).
Workers and capital are being reallocated to newer sectors of the economy, as seen in the employment, activity, and capex numbers, as well as the continued growth of some information technology industries in Japan.
Wasteful public spending, including that in the bloated construction sector, has been declining slowly and steadily month-over-month since the spring 1999 supplementary budget.
Some deflationary pressures are arising out of deregulation in energy and retail, and the spread of discounters (though the bulk of the ongoing deflation is due to the BOJ).
Japanese savers are moving hundreds of billions of dollars out of postal savings into private banks and other investments.
In short, a greater share of Japanese investment capital is being allocated according to market signals than ever before in the postwar era, raising returns and efficiency through the urban-industrial parts of the economy. The signs of oncoming recession are not the final verdict on the economy but a reflection of both the costs of restructuring and the effects of a US slowdown. Japanese potential growth is actually rising and macroeconomic policy should take advantage of this by compensating expansion on the monetary side and by slow contraction fiscally-not by trying to deepen a recession.1
As mentioned above, the one structural barrier to Japan's return to growth has been the ongoing accumulation of NPLs and the resulting continued undercapitalization of the banks.2 Properly capitalized banks do not rollover bad loans because they have enough of their own capital at risk and can bear the costs of writing off bad loans. The costs to Japan of its dysfunctional financial system are enormous in terms of lost growth, missed investments in new firms and projects (due to rollover of bad loans), and low returns on savings. Still, even the Financial Services Agency (FSA) under reform-minded Minister Hakuo Yanagisawa (also chairman of the Financial Reconstruction Commission), let alone the Diet, has been unwilling to take the last step and force the writing-off of NPLs.
On purely economic terms, the
undercapitalization, the nonperforming
loans, and the long-term downward
trend in demand for banking
services should prompt the
Financial Services Agency (FSA)
to close or merge half the
banks in Japan. Though the
political reality will prevent this,
the FSA must make clear to the
public that the Japanese banking
sector must shrink.

The reluctance to pull the trigger appears to be based on the fact that such write-offs would leave most Japanese banks under water, requiring the unpopular steps of another injection of public funds and/or round of closures. The banks' own reports indicate there are 82 trillion yen (16 percent of a year's GDP) worth of NPLs for which they have been partially provisioning. Reliable private sector estimates add another 40 trillion to 50 trillion yen to this number based on the facts that lending has continued into the decadent construction and retail sectors since the last bank recapitalization of April 1999 and that even loans classified as Class I and good Class II (performing) usually show some defaults.3 Meanwhile, the entire banking system has only about 60 trillion yen in capital and losses are expected on their nonfinancial equity holdings.
Ironically, what makes a crisis almost inevitable in Japan this year are the banking reforms undertaken, however grudgingly, to date. Tighter supervision and greater transparency, requiring Japanese banks to mark-to-market value their securities in FY2001, have made the banking system stronger than it was in 1997-98, the last time a financial crisis loomed. The belief that the new accounting standards will actually be enforced is reflected in the fact that the Japanese banks have been selling off their cross-shareholdings and investment stock (that sell-off was the initial force behind the Nikkei's decline in recent months and was also a useful reallocation of capital). Yet, these regulations also mean that come 30 September 2001, when the Japanese banks will have to make their first half-year report under the new accounting standard, all will be revealed. Unlike prior false deadlines announced by Japanese regulators that were finessed, put off, or ignored, this one will be enforced by the markets.
Implementing the write-off of the bad loans should follow what is now a reasonably standardized sequence from other countries' banking crises. First, supervisors truly count and publicly recognize the extent of the bad loans, using market signals about the worth of various assets-those banks whose losses exceed their capital are shut down, with bank shareholders losing all their equity and depositors being reimbursed up to deposit insurance limits. Those banks that have positive but too little (i.e., below prudential standards) capital after taking loan losses, are either sold or merged with other more viable banks or are recapitalized by an infusion of public funds, which are conditional on certain performance requirements-shareholders again take a loss, with some equity shifting at least temporarily to the public sector.4 Also, foreclosed collateral (land) is sold off.
On purely economic terms, the undercapitalization, the NPLs, and the long-term downward trend in demand for banking services should prompt the FSA to close or merge half the banks in Japan. Though the political reality will prevent this, the FSA must make clear to the public that the Japanese banking sector must shrink. The surviving banks, including those with public funds, will be forced to pay off the loan losses over several years, absorbing most profits. Even with proper attempts to hold bank shareholders and management accountable for past mistakes, there will be a large cost to the rest of the Japanese economy. Numerous small- and medium-businesses that cease to have their credit rolled over will go bankrupt and still more will suffer from the effects of declining demand and rising unemployment. Japanese taxpayers will in the end have to pay the lion's share of capital injections into the banking system and the deposit insurance payouts, though they will get back some money from the sale of bank assets.
The early warning indicators
of financial crisis have been going
off in Japan for years now, and
only Japan's accumulated wealth,
the reluctance of its savers to invest
abroad, and the partial policy
reversal of the Obuchi government
in late 1998 have let Japan
get by until now.

None of this is open to dispute. The bottom line is the same for all countries facing banking crises. It is based on the same immutable logic about the incentives of undercapitalized banks and the effect of rolled-over NPLs. If the FSA forces the write-offs without capital injections and bank consolidation, the undercapitalized Japanese banking system will return to the worst days of 1998 and cease to function as either a safe repository of savings or as an allocator of investment. If the FSA allows the banks to "waive" or forgive the loans, instead of writing them off, the Japanese government simply gives these failed businesses a cost-free transfer of funds5; this would add to the bill Japanese taxpayers will pay, thus extending the mistake of the last 10 years. The latest proposals to prop up the Japanese stock market with public purchases of bank-owned stock will not address the problem either. Such measures do not recapitalize the banks or end the wasteful rollovers of loans to firms that should close, and thus behave the same as loan forgiveness (but they give bank stockholders a taxpayer-paid bonus for their poor investments).
Making a Macroeconomic Crisis Out of a Banking Implosion?
The Japanese government confronting its banking system today is in the position of a city planner looking at a multistoried building in danger of collapse on a busy downtown corner. Some time in the coming months, the building will fall down; until then, fewer and fewer people will occupy or go near it, lest they be hit by tumbling debris. The usual response to such a situation is to plant explosives for a controlled implosion, and on a set day, after warning bystanders and occupants, collapse the building in on itself (and only itself). Then rebuilding on that spot can begin. Were the Japanese government to pull the trigger on resolving the bad loan problem-with all its attendant damage to bankrupt small- and medium-enterprises on life-support, and to artificially solvent bank shareholders-it would be performing such a controlled implosion. There would be damage but the bottom would be found in both the Japanese stock and land markets, and expansionary monetary policy could offset the deflationary pressure until the banking system was rebuilt. Capital and labor freed to seek higher returns by these corporate shutdowns would raise Japanese growth within a few quarters.
Alternatively, leaving the NPL problem unaddressed while everyone learns about the Japanese banking system's solvency, and while the world economy slows, would be the equivalent of letting the building collapse abruptly. The bystanders in this analogy who avoid this dangerous though central downtown corner, and thus deplete the city of business, would be akin to the Japanese savers putting their money under their mattresses, into zero-return postal savings accounts, or into capital flight abroad, depleting Japan of investment. Prompting panic in the Japanese government bond (JGB) market by currently unnecessary and ill-timed calls for fiscal consolidation and/or by continued countenance of deflation by the BOJ would be even worse. Such policies would be just as wantonly destructive a way of addressing the NPLs as it would be for that city planner to not only remove the collapsing building by blowing up the entire city block, but by placing the explosives under the sound buildings on the opposite side in the hope that they would collapse onto the unsound one.
Thus, the type of crisis at risk in macroeconomic brinkmanship-be it passive failure to offset the costs of the banking problem or active attempts to scare others into changing course-is very different from the costs of resolving the banking problem. For one thing, such escalation is unnecessary. Characterizations of Japanese public finances as being on the verge of collapse are misplaced. The real problem with outstanding Japanese government debt is not its large size.6 Until the signs of panic during March 2001, Japan had a relatively flat yield curve, low long-term nominal bond yields, a stable yen in the Y112-Y116/dollar range, and deflationary expectations among price and wage setters, all of which indicated a near complete lack of market concern about the solvency of the Japanese government. This calm was justified because Japanese net national savings remain enormous, net Japanese government debt is far lower than the gross debt to GDP ratio-less than 6 percent of JGBs outstanding are held by foreigners-and all of the debt is yen-denominated.
Instead, the real problem with Japanese government debt is one of illiquidity. As long as the banking system problems remain unresolved (i.e. growth is constrained by poor capital allocation and as a result banks are over-invested in JGBs), the Japanese bond market is vulnerable to destructive panics (i.e., abrupt, large, sell-offs in the JGB market). This is just what occurred in January 1999, when long JGB interest rates spiked 175 basis points following an unjustified Moody's downgrade of Japanese public debt and a doom-predicting pronouncement about the debt out of the Ministry of Finance's (MOF's) Trust Fund Bureau. An inadequately quick countering expansion of liquidity from the BOJ, let alone a tightening of policy, would effectively validate and prolong such an interest rate rise. This is precisely what happened in February 1999, after the BOJ was slow to respond to the spike, and long-bond rates have remained since then 50-75 basis points higher than in December 1998.
If the nonperforming loans are
not resolved sometime between now
and 30 September 2001, that
breathing space will run out
and a financial crisis will hit Japan.

It is possible that the BOJ's announcement of 19 March that it would not raise rates again until consumer price index (CPI) inflation is greater than zero indicates that a cooperative response is coming from the Japanese government. Yet all the players in this game-BOJ, FSA, MOF, Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry (METI), and Diet members-have reversed their stated positions many times without any real change in actions. The risk is that Japanese officials are so intent on playing chicken with each other and with the Diet that this JGB panic scenario is likely to repeat. Some budget hawks are willing to risk a bond sell-off in hopes of forcing a BOJ loosening and budgetary restraint from the Diet; Hayami remains unwilling to actively counter deflation in hopes of scaring the government into carrying through the bank clean-up. From whatever source, such an induced JGB panic raises the probability of outright financial crisis so long as the NPLs are outstanding. Even if Hayami, Miyazawa, and Yanagisawa are simply slow to come to agreement, they may well find that their prior brinkmanship has led to the crisis that so many in the cheap seats have asked for.
Such a crisis of self-destructive macroeconomic policy, however, would not lead to the resolution of the banking crisis and the NPLs problem, and will likely make them worse. Provoking a panic in the JGB market, through calls for either deflation or austerity, will lead to a combination of capital flight from Japan and sharply rising long-term interest rates. Such a crisis will hit the good or restructuring Japanese firms along with those inefficient firms on financial life-support. In fact, given the econometric evidence that information imperfections in financial markets increase in recessions, the resulting financial contraction will likely disproportionately hit new investment projects from good firms and the creation of new businesses.
Some cynics retort that such macroeconomic gambits were and are justified because there is no other way to get action on banking reform. Yet, these cynics are themselves naïve about political economy if they believe that the onset of a crisis is more likely to prompt constructive action than a negotiated deal among the players. As seen not only in the case of the construction firms and small retailers in Japan from 1992 to 1998 but also in the examples of the chaebol in Korea in 1998-99 and the natural resource monopolies in Russia since Gorbachev, especially during hard times, it is the already politically protected businesses that are spared, not the ones that suffer as public spending is cut. Meanwhile, based on pure economics, contractionary macroeconomic policy in recessionary times is not creative but destructive because it actually puts more of the wrong firms out of business-you gain nothing from causing additional national suffering.7 That is why the structural improvements underway in Japan described above took hold during the weak expansion since the fall of 1998 and not before.
If the Bush administration is sincere
about its commitment to crisis
prevention instead of bailouts, it
will use its bank supervisory powers-and
their effects on market sentiment-to
carefully and quietly but firmly
pressure the Japanese government
to address its accumulating
bad loan problem.

Most important, unlike directly addressing the banking system problems, such an economy-wide crisis once set in motion has no clear ending point. Once capital starts leaving Japan, and once sell-offs of JGBs begin, most policy responses (such as raising short-term interest rates) will only make matters worse. Such a crisis would arise out of the willful acts of frustrated Japanese policymakers- policymakers apparently incapable of resolving the banking crisis that the United States, France, Sweden, and even numerous developing economies managed to resolve in much less time-and only accelerate the collapse of confidence.
So what should the Japanese government do? The alternative policy agenda is not new but nonetheless is more likely to be successful than policies promoted solely for the sake of their radical nature:8
Japanese officials should stop calling attention to government debt until the banking recapitalization is complete. Talking only makes an imminent problem out of something that can and will have to grow before being slowly resolved.
The FSA should force the banks to write-off the NPLs and be recapitalized (with public funds) or shut down. Now that the more transparent accounting rules have forced sales of shares and fuller disclosure, this is inevitable. It is both necessary and sufficient to return Japan toward sustained growth.
The BOJ should offset the transitional deflationary force of the bankruptcies caused by the NPL write-offs with expansionary monetary policy through purchases of JGBs, dollars, and euros-but not stocks-with printed yen.
Whether the BOJ (or US industry) wants it to or not, the yen is going to depreciate until the banking problem is resolved, either through a responsible monetary expansion (as in point 3 above) or through capital flight when a larger crisis hits. Better for the BOJ to anchor the long-term expectations with a multi-year inflation or exchange rate target and try to claim credit for the yen's decline than to fail in an attempt to fight the depreciation.
The Japanese government budget can engage in essentially revenue-neutral expansion by shifting spending from wasteful public works to tax cuts aimed at salarymen.9 An enormous difference between the multipliers on the two types of policies was seen in the 1990s, with (temporary) tax cuts and public works spending largely saved or ignored.
The remaining financial burden on Japan of illiquid real estate markets can be partially alleviated if the tax cuts in point 5 above emphasize housing. One option would be to offer money saved on cancelled public construction projects to home sellers as rebates for their mortgage losses incurred. Such a measure would be both structurally sound and expansionary.
What a Crisis Would Mean
In blunt terms then, the choice for Japan in 2001 is between the political crisis for the LDP leadership, which would follow writing off the NPLs/recapitalizing the banks, and the outright financial crisis, which will occur if 30 September is reached without addressing the bad loans problem-sooner if the brinkmanship of the MOF or the BOJ or an external shock causes panic in the vulnerable system before then. If such a wider crisis were to occur in Japan, it would entail disintermediation from the Japanese banking system-that is a sharp rise in nominal interest rates, widening interest rate spreads, a breakdown in corporate investment, deep cuts in bank lending, further declines in equities and land prices, possible bank runs, and an outright contraction of real activity. Its effects would not be transmitted solely through the financial system, however, but would also directly erode consumer confidence in the government and the economy, and would lead to an outright outflow of investors from yen-denominated assets.10 Such a sequence of events began to unfold in Japan in the first half of 1998, but was halted by the reform efforts (including partial bank recapitalization) of the government of the late Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi.
Given that the present choice is
between a controlled implosion
of the Japanese banking system
(with efficiency benefits) and an
uncontrolled financial crisis (with
international spillovers), which
may leave the banking problems
unaddressed or worsened, the
US government has a direct interest
in using its financial leverage to
encourage the Japanese government
to quickly take the first option.

The international repercussions of such an abrupt collapse would include the frightening litany made familiar by the Asian economic crisis of 1997-98:
Collapsing demand in Japan would directly hit the growth of its developing neighbors, in the form of diminished imports and FDI.
A weakening yen would put Asian emerging markets under currency pressure themselves and declines in their exchange rates would make shakier their foreign debt service and inflows of capital.
Trade frictions with the United States and other developed economies would increase as a declining yen and reduced Japanese import demand would put Western export industries under "unfair" competition.
Multilateral efforts for a new WTO round or for reform of the international financial institutions or for third-world debt forgiveness would be stalled by the breakdown of the world's second largest economy and largest aid donor.
The direct impact upon the now weakening US economy would be large. Obviously, there would be import surges driven by a declining yen, particularly in steel, autos, machinery, and electronics, broadening our current account deficit to unprecedented levels and increasing congressional demands for trade protection.11 Slower Japanese economic growth and declining Japanese asset prices mean declining demand for American goods and declining wealth for American investors in general.
On the capital flows side, we can expect sales of Japanese-owned American assets to rise for the next couple of months, through the start of the new fiscal year in April and a bit beyond. Japanese businesses will want cash on hand, and even after recent developments in US markets, their American assets will be easier to sell and more valuable than their illiquid Japanese land assets and depreciating Japanese securities. After this initial capital outflow, however, Japanese savers will join foreigners in selling yen-denominated assets and money will flow back into the US and European markets from Japan, perhaps for many months. This is not all bad, primarily because a declining yen relieves some of the inflationary pressure, which might make the Federal Reserve hesitant to cut interest rates. Yet such portfolio flows would be as much "hot money" for the United States as they would be for an emerging market and they might well push artificially and unsustainably both asset markets and the current account away from their needed corrections.
Whether the impact on the world economy from a crisis in Japan would be less than in 1997-98 is an open question. Now that many economies in the region have adapted to a stagnating Japan and many investors have gotten out of Japanese assets, the impact could be lesser than last time, or the impact could be even greater because a significantly slower US economy and a less-than-fully recovered Asian region would be less able to offset the demand effects of Japanese contraction. If we prefer not to find out the answer to that question from experience-and if the Japanese government remains more afraid of taking the political hit for pulling the trigger on the bad loans and bank recapitalization than of an economic crisis-the United States government must put pressure on Japan now for a direct resolution of the NPL problem.
Just as the Clinton administration found, the Bush administration will soon find that when the government that rules the world's second largest economy does not live up to its economic responsibilities, it is everybody's immediate problem. Even those priests of purer high politics-based foreign policy will find that a national security alliance with a nation rests on that nation's economy growing on average at its potential. This will be especially true of Japan-an ally whose primary contribution comes from being wealthy rather than from being combat ready. If we believe that the long brewing financial crisis is finally about to hit Japan due to its incomplete banking reform and its self-eroding monetary policy, there is little question the United States has a national interest in getting those reforms completed and reversing that monetary policy. The real question is whether the US government can do anything to make the Japanese government implement its promised policies.
In fact, a big stick remains within easy reach of the US government and luckily it is one that works best when wielded quietly. US financial regulators not only have the capability but the legal responsibility to insulate the American banking system from foreign banks that represent a significant payment risk. At the far outside end of this competence, a subset or all of a specific country's banks can be excluded from being parties with American banks-such a radical measure is tantamount to economic warfare and would never even be considered as an option for Japanese banks or those of any democratic ally. There are many much smaller steps, however, which can usefully be taken or threatened to be taken by American regulators to increase the pressure on the Japanese government to clean up the NPLs before a financial crisis breaks out.
The Fed and other regulators can, for example, increase their scrutiny of Japanese bank subsidiaries in the United States or of American banks doing extensive business with Japanese counterparts, as they have done in the past with Latin American financial institutions during times of financial fragility there. Increased scrutiny on either set of institutions represents a small tax that is discouraging at the margin transpacific flows; more importantly, as word gets out to the markets that supervisors are taking such care with Japanese banks, interbank overnight rates will increase for Japanese banks (the Japan premium will return). Requirements that American subsidiaries of Japanese banks have enough liquid assets on hand in the United States to settle overnight balances would have similar effects on the markets and would put direct pressure on the BOJ (which in practice would probably provide most of the short-term liquidity to its domestic banks). While not often remarked upon, such limited but powerful measures were taken by US regulators in 1998, prior to the Obuchi government's partial bank reforms.
Of course, as word gets out into the markets, such measures run the risk of prompting the crisis the US government is hoping to get the Japanese government to prevent. For the United States, facing Japan in coming months would be much like the International Monetary Fund (IMF) confronting the Thai government in spring 1997: if the IMF did not express to the markets its belief that Thai policies were leading to a financial crisis, there would be no credible threat to provoke a change in policy. Yet too great a disclosure too soon could bring on the crisis before policy could change. Most observers of the Asian crisis have since concluded that it would have been better for the world economy had the IMF put more pressure on Thailand and disclosed more earlier.
The early warning indicators of financial crisis have been going off in Japan for years now, and only Japan's accumulated wealth, the reluctance of its savers to invest abroad, and the partial policy reversal of the Obuchi government in late 1998 have let Japan get by until now. If the NPLs are not resolved sometime between now and 30 September 2001 that breathing space will run out and a financial crisis will hit Japan. A financial crisis in Japan will assuredly be a "systemic risk." Because Japan is a surplus country, the IMF has no real traction on its behavior; the G-7 process, demonstrating its latest failure to sufficiently exercise peer pressure and surveillance, has appeared to have had no effect on Japanese behavior except in September 1998, when direct American and financial market pressure on Japan were highest. If the Bush administration is sincere about its commitment to crisis prevention instead of bailouts, it will use its bank supervisory powers-and their effects on market sentiment-to carefully and quietly but firmly pressure the Japanese government to address its accumulating bad loan problem.
In the end, it is up to the elected representatives of the Japanese people and their cabinet, not foreigners, to implement thorough banking reform. If those leaders take the decisive actions of which they have so often spoken, there will be no crisis (and no need for US pressure). But right now, those Japanese politicians seem unconcerned, if not eager, to provoke an avoidable macroeconomic crisis in Japan and around the world rather than face the political crisis that they believe bad loan foreclosure and banking recapitalization would cause. All those with some say about Japanese economic policy-which includes the US government as well as the Japanese private sector-must encourage the government that succeeds Prime Minister Mori to recognize that the collapse is imminent and that it is better to set off a controlled implosion than have the building fall down on you.
Notes
1. Adam Posen, "Recognizing Japan's Rising Potential Growth," NIRA Review, Winter 2001, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 48-53.
2. See the chapters by Friedman, Glauber, Kashyap, and Shimizu in Japan's Financial Crisis and Its Parallels with U.S. Experience, Ryoichi Mikitani and Adam S. Posen, eds. 2000. Institute for International Economics, Washington DC.
3. Prices for distressed loans in secondary or securitized credit markets that exist in Japan today are consistent with these estimates of the worth of outstanding NPLs.
4. Some measure of supervisory discretion will have to be used to determine which banks to shut, both because market signals are noisy during periods of economic contraction and uncertainty, real estate markets for collateral will remain illiquid, and because there is a limit to how many accountants and supervisors the FSA can mobilize in the time remaining. Nevertheless market indicators should be taken seriously and general principles for assessing capital adequacy should be announced ahead of time.
5. Apparently, Yanagisawa is now proposing such half measures (see David Ibison, "Japan set to duck key banking reform," Financial Times, 21 March 2001, p. 13). Assuming that whatever the Japanese government does will be a consensus policy and that Yanagisawa would come to the negotiations as the representative of the tough reformer position, this augurs poorly, summit agreements notwithstanding.
6. See Adam S. Posen, "The Real Trouble With Japanese Debt," The International Economy (July/August 2000).
7. As argued in Adam S. Posen, Restoring Japan's Economic Growth, chapter 6. 1998. Institute for International Economics, Washington DC; and in Adam S. Posen, "Little creative benefit in recession," Financial Times, August 2, 2000, p. 11.
8. The details of how to implement these or similar policies have been set out in previous publications, including Restoring Japan's Economic Growth (chapter 5). 1998. Institute for International Economics, Washington DC; Adam S. Posen, "Implementing Japanese Recovery," Policy Brief No. 99-1, Institute for International Economics, Washington DC; Adam S. Posen, "Nothing to Fear but Fear (of Inflation) Itself", Policy Brief No. 99-9, Institute for International Economics, Washington DC; and Japan's Financial Crisis and Its Parallels with U.S. Experience, Ryoichi Mikitani and Adam S. Posen, eds. 2000. Institute for International Economics, Washington DC.
9. Strict Keynesian algebra, of course, tells us that a balanced budget multiplier is less than one, whereas all public works spending has a multiplier of at least one. In the case of Japanese public works, however, much of the public works spending takes on the attributes of transfers, and construction firm owners, seeing the end of the gravy train coming, seem to display Ricardian behavior. This is under research.
10. Adam S. Posen, Restoring Japan's Economic Growth, chapter 4, 1998, Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, spells out in more detail such a financial crisis scenario, its economic underpinnings, and the international implications given below.
11. See the analysis in Marcus Noland, et al, "The Continuing Asian Financial Crisis: Global Adjustment and Trade," Working Paper No. 99-4, Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, which examined what was likely to happen as a result of the crisis of 1998-98.

The author is Reginald Jones Senior Fellow at the Institute for International Economics. He is coeditor of The Ex-Im Bank in the 21st Century: A New Approach? (2000) and Unfinished Business: Telecommunications after the Uruguay Round (1997).
The US Export-Import Bank (Ex-Im) celebrated its 65th birthday in 1999. While congratulations were in order, this venerable institution needs an overhaul. Renewal of the Bank's charter in 2001 offers Congress an excellent opportunity to go to work. This policy brief offers recommendations based on insights contained in the Institute's new volume, The Ex-Im Bank in the 21st Century: A New Approach?, edited by Gary Clyde Hufbauer and Rita M. Rodriguez.
The Export Context
Ex-Im could have been safely retired at age 65 if there was nothing special about exports. But there is something special. Exports of goods and services have been a major source of US growth for 40 years. Since 1960, the share of US gross domestic product accounted for by exports has tripled. In the 1990s, even as US growth-powered by the forces of the new economy-turned in one of its best performances ever, the export share rose from 9.2 percent to 10.3 percent.

As J. David Richardson amply demonstrates, when other characteristics of the firm are held constant, exporting firms perform much better than nonexporters. For example, worker productivity can be 20 percent higher. Moreover, export jobs are better jobs: production workers in exporting firms earn 6.5 percent higher pay. They are also more stable jobs: exporting firms are 9 percent less likely to go out of business than comparable nonexporting firms.1
Despite the dramatic export expansion, the United States will run a trade deficit over $400 billion in 2001. The deficit is no cause for panic but thoughtful
In recent years, the Ex-Im
[Bank] has been hampered
both by a shortage of money
and its own legislative
constraints from effectively
supporting US diplomacy.

observers conclude that it cannot be sustained.2 There are two ways the deficit can be reduced: slower import growth or faster export growth. For the health of the United States and the world economy, more exports are far better than fewer imports.
While Ex-Im is only one way-and a comparatively modest way at that-of promoting US export growth, it has two unique functions. First, Ex-Im helps secure a level playing field for US exporters in the face of foreign export credit competition; second, it corrects market failures in trade finance. These missions have challenged Ex-Im for at least three decades; what is new is the environment of world export competition.
The New Environment of World Export Competition
Ex-Im and similar official export credit agencies (ECAs) in other countries traditionally finance exports of capital goods, mainly but not entirely, to developing countries. Competition in these markets has changed dramatically since the 1970s, when the industrial nations first agreed to a "ceasefire" in export credit competition under the auspices of the OECD Arrangement on Officially Supported Export Credits.
Thirty years ago, the dominant users of ECAs were vertically integrated "national champions" like Siemens, Hitachi, and General Electric. In that era, large firms were not nimble at changing the source of components for major capital goods. Instead, each firm would strive to produce components at designated factories within its corporate structure. The goal of ECAs was to ensure that their national champion won the order; and the goal of the OECD Arrangement was to limit highly subsidized competition between the ECAs. Today, things are different:
No longer are major capital goods, such as power plants and civil aircraft, made in vertically organized firms based entirely in a single country. Instead, economic efficiency requires enormous amounts of outsourcing. The value-added chain is sliced up and the slices are located wherever production costs are lowest.
Responding to this new reality, important trading nations are using export credits (among other industrial incentives) in a strategic fashion to attract procurement and direct investment from multinational corporations that can choose from a range of locations around the world.
Small- and medium-sized companies are becoming a bigger factor in the export picture. One reason is slicing and dicing of the value-added chain. Another reason is falling communication and transportation costs: air freight, fiber optics, and the Internet are all helping smaller firms reach new customers overseas. But small companies are still handicapped by the cumbersome character of trade finance.
Meanwhile, foreign ECAs have invented clever ways around the OECD Arrangement, to the disadvantage of US exporters. Unlike the Ex-Im Bank, where operating procedures are rooted in the bureaucratic practices of the 1980s, many foreign ECAs have acquired the streamlined characteristics of market competitors, while retaining the advantages of government support.
Securing a Level Playing Field: Olive Branches and Arrows
In the field of export credit competition, as in many dimensions of international affairs, the olive branch is diplomacy. Through continued negotiations under OECD auspices, the industrial countries have whittled down the subsidies offered by official government export financing programs. But despite US efforts, the OECD Arrangement has not been extended to cover new practices and institutions that indirectly distort credit terms and export competition. This is where the arrows come into play-specifically Ex-Im. Unless the United States, through Ex-Im, is prepared to find ways to counter the financing terms offered outside the letter of the OECD Arrangement, foreign governments have little incentive to extend the rules, through OECD negotiations, to cover the new practices and institutions.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the United States successfully used both olive branches and arrows to curb wasteful competition among OECD countries in the export credit realm. Subsidized interest rates, unrealistic loan terms, tied aid, and bargain
In the era of high US trade
deficits, it is not acceptable for
the US government simply to sit back
and accept the market-distorting
practices that have crept into
the export credit picture.

insurance terms were all brought back to commercial norms, as Peter C. Evans and Kenneth A. Oye document.3 But in recent years Ex-Im has been hampered both by a shortage of money and its own legislative constraints from effectively supporting US diplomacy. The result is the growing importance of financial practices that skirt the edges of the OECD Arrangement on Official Supported Export Credits.
In an era of high US trade deficits, it is not acceptable for the US government simply to sit back and accept the market-distorting practices that have crept into the export credit picture. Over the last few years, three financial practices have badly eroded the value of the OECD Arrangement, disadvantaging US exporters: market windows, untied aid, and interest make up.
Market windows. These are official institutions that operate both as official lenders and private banks. Canada's Export Development Corporation and Germany's Kreditenanstalt f r Wiederaufbau are the leading exemplars. The Canadian and German market windows, as described by Allan I. Mendelowitz, are hybrid institutions with advantages over both private banks and official
Innovation in the private financial
markets has moved at a breathtaking
pace. But these innovations have
not yet transformed the world of
trade finance and export credits are
nowhere near as perfect a market
as home mortgages.

ECAs.4 Together, they did $12 billion of financing in 1999. Unlike private banks, market windows get start-up money from the government; pay no corporate income taxes; raise funds with an implicit government guarantee; and some of their administrative costs may be shifted to the government payroll. Unlike official ECAs, market windows can respond rapidly and flexibly to commercial opportunities, and they can pay competitive salaries to attract talented personnel. Market windows have so far insisted-against US objections-that they are not subject to the OECD Arrangement and its reporting requirements. Ex-Im may not even know that it faces competition from a foreign market window until the deal is lost.
Untied aid. In principle, untied aid is bilateral aid extended to a developing country with no requirement that the recipient procure goods and services from the donor country. The annual volume of untied aid is running about $11 billion. Supposedly the recipient country can use the aid funds to procure goods and services from the cheapest source worldwide. In practice, "untied aid" is an oxymoron. The recipient country knows very well who is providing the funds and places orders accordingly. Japan is the most important donor of untied aid. Peter C. Evans and Kenneth A. Oye provide a detailed case study of Chinese power plant purchases demonstrating that, for practical purposes, Japanese untied aid finances procurement from Japan.5 Unlike tied aid, nominally untied aid need not have a minimum 35 percent grant element. And unlike normal export credits, untied aid need not observe minimum commercial terms of the OECD Arrangement (interest rate, downpayment, and maturity terms). Putting these two loopholes together, untied aid amounts to a backdoor route for subsidizing export credits.
Interest make up. Several European ECAs (e.g., France, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom) use this method to provide official export credits at the fixed rates permitted under the OECD Arrangement. In this method, commercial banks are guaranteed a return equal to the cost of borrowed funds (say the London Interbank Offer Rate, Libor), plus a spread of 40 to 150 basis points a year, when they provide official financing to overseas borrowers. Thus the ECAs "make up" the difference between the permitted OECD Arrangement rate and the commercial cost of funds. There is nothing wrong with this. However, the size of the "make up" may be excessively generous, relative to the services provided and the risks taken by the commercial bank. In turn, the generous spreads may induce European commercial banks to provide export financing for projects and countries that US commercial banks would not extend to US exporters. In extreme cases, the European commercial banks may even "kick back" some of the extra spread to the borrower, providing an additional inducement to buy European exports.
Market Failures in Private Trade Finance
Over the past decade, innovation in the private financial markets has moved at a breathtaking pace-but not in the realm of export finance, where the trend has been more retreat than attack. Commercial banks have merged with investment companies and insurance firms, and a whole new menu of financial products has been invented. These innovations have not, however, transformed the world of trade finance, and export credits are nowhere near as perfect a market as home mortgages. Market failures today are different than they were 20 years ago, but they are no less important:
On average, in 1995-98, the United States exported $128 billion of capital goods annually to developing countries (table 1). Many of these developing countries enjoyed reputations for economic stability-before the 1994-95 Mexican crisis and the 1997-98 Asian crisis. In the wake of the financial crises of the 1990s, however, commercial banks reevaluated the risks of trade finance. Today, as William R. Cline explains, they are less willing to accept medium- and long-term export credit risk (terms over 1 year), even for shipments by major US corporations to steady markets such as Brazil and Korea.6
Meanwhile, small- and medium-sized exporters (whose ranks grew by 65 percent in the 1990s) report difficulty getting export credits, even for shipments to Europe or Japan. Small exporters are not big enough to establish strong client relationships with giant banks, and their trade finance business is not worth the hassle for medium-sized banks. Dot.com trade finance is still on the drawing boards. Banks have not yet securitized trade credits the way they have routinely bundled home mortgages.
Meeting the Challenge
Our competitors abroad have found new ways to play the export financing game at the official level, while the private financial markets at home have not yet perfected export financing packages. This has left many US exporters between the proverbial rock and hard place. Ex-Im is the arm of the US government that should buttress US diplomacy in curbing export credit subsidies (however disguised). Ex-Im should also step in when private export finance is not available for particular foreign markets and aspiring US exporters. But Ex-Im is seriously disadvantaged in fulfilling its two core missions-providing arrows to reinforce the US stance in official negotiations, and stepping in when private markets fail. Ex-Im is limited by the modest size of its financial muscle, relative both to competitor ECAs and the needs of the export market (see table 1). Ex-Im is also limited by legislative constraints. There is not much point in giving Ex-Im more financial muscle unless the legislative constraints are first addressed.
One way around this conundrum, advocated by William A. Niskanen, is to retire the US Ex-Im Bank and bring cases to the World Trade Organization against the export credit practices of other countries.7 A recent WTO panel opinion, addressing a dispute between Canada and Brazil involving civil aircraft, provides a possible opening for this kind of litigation.8 There are two practical difficulties with Niskanen's approach, however. First, US exporters would probably not support time-consuming WTO litigation that would greatly annoy their potential customer abroad. Second, if the US Trade Representative nevertheless brought a series of test cases to the WTO, the ensuing disputes would spark considerable friction with Europe, Japan, and Canada-countries that are essential partners in launching a new round of WTO negotiations.
These considerations argue that Congress should relax the legislative constraints that hamper Ex-Im and, at the same time, give the Bank new financial muscle.
Legislative contraints. Ex-Im faces several congressional mandates that make it a sluggish competitor. Three should be singled out for correction in the 2001 charter renewal:
Under existing law, as described by Allan I. Mendelowitz, Ex-Im must ensure that that there is less than 15 percent foreign content in the exports it supports.9 While the Ex-Im changed its procedures in 2000 so as to apply the foreign content rule more flexibly, the requirement can still be at odds with new ways of doing business, slicing and dicing the value-added chain with components from a range of countries. Ex-Im should be permitted to act as the umbrella finance agency when a major project is predominantly built with US capital equipment, even if US exports do not amount to 85 percent of the total. However, Ex-Im should keep a running set of records with other ECAs to ensure that they either refinance part of the project, or that, in their role as the umbrella finance agency for other projects, they finance an equivalent amount of US exports.
Over the last 20 years, Congress has given Ex-Im multiple tasks with national interest overtones. Ex-Im is mandated to meet official competition worldwide, make sound credit calls on risky transactions, create new financial instruments to access US capital markets, manage more than $60 billion of global assets in a wide range of legal and financial systems, and aggressively help small, rural, and environmental exporters. Yet over the same period, Ex-Im has been administratively starved. It has roughly the same staff numbers as 20 years ago, it has minimal flexibility in its pay and average grade structure,10 and its information technology system is outdated. Congress should scale up Ex-Im's administrative capability to the size and scope of its mission.
There are times when economic sanctions are necessary, whatever the cost in terms of exports. For Ex-Im, economic sanctions are more an issue of reputation than reality. In 1999, for example, Ex-Im was closed for foreign policy reasons in only five markets: Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, and Pakistan. To reduce the "reputation cost" of sanctions, Congress could require that Ex-Im Bank transactions only be withheld for foreign policy reasons upon direct approval of the President, after consultation with the appropriate congressional committees. Currently, the power to curtail Ex-Im transactions for foreign policy reasons, contained in the Chafee Amendment, is delegated to the Secretary of State.
With new legislative mandate and
more financial muscle, Ex-Im…
can reinforce US diplomatic efforts
to update the OECD Arrangement
to curtail untied aid and bring
market windows and interest
make up plans within the purview
of official discipline, and fill
holes in private trade finance.

Financial muscle. Table 1 compares Ex-Im's financial muscle with its major competitors. The focus is on medium- and long-term credits (credits over 1 year), the arena where competition is hottest. In recent years, Ex-Im's medium- and long-term credits amounted to about 4 percent of US capital goods exports to the world, and 8 percent of US capital goods exports to less developed countries (LDCs). The figures for competing G-7 industrial exporters were 6 percent and 15 percent respectively. These comparisons, coupled with business experience recorded in The Ex-Im Bank in the 21st Century, point to a clear recommendation. Ex-Im should increase its medium- and long-term credit activity by at least 50 percent so that it can effectively carry out its dual mission. With this increase, Ex-Im's total annual budget for new export credits, guarantees, and insurance would rise to about $20 billion, up from the current figure of about $13 billion annually.11
Under its current authorizing legislation, Ex-Im is permitted a total of $75 billion of loans, guarantees, and insurance outstanding at any one time.12 Of this amount, $61.6 billion had been used at the end of fiscal year 2000. Annual repayments of outstanding loans, and expiration of guarantees and insurance, amount to about $10 billion annually. To support $20 billion of new activity each year in FY 2002 and FY 2003, and to provide a cushion for extraordinary circumstances, Ex-Im ceiling should be raised to at least $110 billion.13
The immediate constraint facing Ex-Im, however, is not the ceiling on loans, guarantees, and insurance. Instead, it is the combination of annual appropriations to cover possible losses together with the schedule of required reserve ratios. Annual congressional appropriations have been running about $800 million to $900 million. For FY 2001, the figure is $927 million. The OMB (in consultation with Ex-Im) sets required reserve ratios on loans, guarantees, and insurance for different countries and sectors to cover potential losses. The ratios are very conservative and Ex-Im reserves have now reached $10 billion to cover possible losses on assets of $60 billion.14 In order to support a 50 percent increase in annual activity, a combination of two measures should be taken. OMB should modestly reduce the required reserve ratios for seasoned loans and Congress should raise the current level of appropriations from $927 million in FY 2001 to about $1.3 billion in FY 2002.
By contrast, with this recommendation, President Bush's budget calls for a 25 percent cut in Ex-Im's appropriation, to $699 million in FY 2002.15 Ex-Im's total activity would be slashed from $12.6 billion in FY 2000 to $8.5 billion in FY 2002. Cutting Ex-Im's budget would be a major mistake. It would undermine US commercial diplomacy and US exporters.
Besides increasing Ex-Im's financial muscle, Congress should give Ex-Im legal authority to compete in the 21st century of export finance, both to support US exports and to bolster the OECD Arrangement. The legal authority would have several components, any of which could be implemented with Treasury approval:
Power to match market-distorting "market window" activity both in third world markets and within the United States.16
Power to use the so-called "war chest" funds to match officially untied aid.17
Power to launch an "interest make up" program similar to the European programs.
Conclusion
With a new legislative mandate and more financial muscle, Ex-Im can fulfill its twin missions. On the one hand, it can reinforce US diplomatic efforts to update the OECD Arrangement to curtail untied aid and bring market windows and interest make up plans fully within the purview of official discipline. On the other hand, it can fill the holes in private trade finance. Both missions will provide welcome support for US exports. Without new authority from Congress, Ex-Im will sink into irrelevance, US exporters will be put at a severe disadvantage in world markets, and the US economy will suffer substantially.
Table 1: Medium- and long-term official export credits related to capital goods exports, annual average 1995-98
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total for the G-7 Except for the
 

US


Canada


Japan


France


Germany


Italy


UK



United States





Medium- and long-term credits
($ billions)


10.5


3.5


10.9


8.0


10.7


1.8



3.2




38.2



World


270.9


34.4


212.1


86.8


173.6


72.0


91.3


670.2


LDCs


128.1


3.2


110.8


29.2


56.1


26.9


29.3


255.3


World


4


10


5


9


6


2


4


6


LDCs


8


112


10


27


19


7


11


15

Notes
1. J. David Richardson. 2001. "Exports Matter… And So Does Trade Finance", in The Ex-Im Bank in the 21st Century: A New Approach?, eds. Gary Clyde Hufbauer and Rita M. Rodriguez. Washington DC: Institute for International Economics. Also see J. David Richardson and Karin Rindal. 1996. Why Exports Matter More! Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics and The Manufacturing Institute.
2. Catherine L. Mann. 1999. Is the U.S. Trade Deficit Sustainable? Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics. Also, Catherine L. Mann. 2001. "Is the US Trade Deficit Still Sustainable? (Is this the right question?)" Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics. March 1.
3. Peter C. Evans and Kenneth A. Oye, "International Competition: Conflict and Cooperation in Government Export Financing". In Hufbauer and Rodriguez, op. cit.
4. 4. Allan I. Mendelowitz. 2001. "The New World of Government-Supported International Financing". In Hufbauer and Rodriguez, op. cit.
5. Peter C. Evans and Kenneth A. Oye. 2001. "International Competition: Conflict and Cooperation in Government Export Financing", in Hufbauer and Rodriguez, op. cit.
6. William R. Cline. 2001. "Ex-Im, Exports, and Private Capital: Will Financial Markets Squeeze the Bank?" In Hufbauer and Rodriguez, op. cit.
7. William A. Niskanen, "Should Ex-Im Bank Be Retired". In Hufbauer and Rodriguez, op. cit.
8. A. Ian Gillespie, "A Canadian Perspective". In Hufbauer and Rodriguez, op. cit.
9. Allan I. Mendelowitz, op. cit.
10. Ex-Im can hire only 35 employees outside the normal civil service pay structure.
11. An argument sometimes made against increasing Ex-Im's budget is that Ex-Im will turn into another giant government credit agency, like Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae. The comparison is totally misleading. Together, the two home finance agencies have floated about $1.4 trillion of securitized loans. By comparison with these elephants, Ex-Im is a mouse.
12. Export-Import Bank of the United States. 2000 Annual Report, p. 42.
13. The rough calculation is as follows. Two years of new credit activity at $20 billion per year equals $40 billion. Two years of repaid loans and expired guarantees and insurance at $10 billion per year equals $20 billion repaid. Additional authorization for extraordinary activity (matching untied aid and short-term crisis loans) equals $10 billion. Cushion at the end of FY2003 equals $5 billion. Total authorization ceiling equals present authorization of $75 billion plus $40 billion minus $20 billion plus $10 billion plus $5 billion equals $110 billion.
14. Under the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1980, Ex-Im is required to set aside very generous reserves for potential credit, insurance, and guarantee losses. Annual appropriates cover these reserves. According to Allan I. Mendelowitz, op. cit., Ex-Im's excess reserves over probable losses may total $10 billion.
15. As reported in Inside U.S. Trade, vol. 19, no. 9, March 2, 2001.
16. To match market window finance within the United States, the powers under Section 1912 of the Ex-Im statute should be widened.
17. The "war chest" was created in the mid-1980s so that the Ex-Im could match tied aid. It succeeded in invigorating negotiations that significantly curtailed tied aid. See Peter C. Evans and Kenneth A. Oye, op. cit.

Lori G. Kletzer is a visiting fellow at the Institute for International Economics and an associate professor of Economics at the University of California, Santa Cruz. Robert E. Litan is vice president and director of the Economic Studies Program at the Brookings Institution, where he also holds the Cabot Family Chair in Economics. The authors thank Samara Potter for her invaluable research assistance and C. Fred Bergsten, Gary Burtless, Catherine L. Mann, J. David Richardson, and Charles Schultze for their comments on this brief's earlier drafts. This policy is being simultaneously published by the Institute for International Economics and the Brookings Institution.
With the sharp slowing of the US economy, worker anxiety is back in the news. But even during healthy economic times such as the late 1990s, workers feared layoffs and general job instability. The failure of Congress to approve fast-track trade negotiating authority in 1997 strongly suggests that no American president will be successful in persuading Congress and the American people to accept further trade liberalization until additional measures, aimed specifically at easing the pain of worker dislocations and encouraging rapid reemployment, are embraced by federal policymakers. In this brief, we outline and present cost estimates for two such proposals: wage insurance for qualifying displaced workers upon reemployment, and subsidies for health insurance for qualifying unemployed displaced workers. Both programs would provide benefits to full-time workers who have been dislocated, for any reason, from jobs they have held for at least two years.
Americans have been bombarded by media coverage of the slowing US economy. During the last 3 months of 2000, the economy generated an average of 46,000 new jobs per month, a pace much slower than the average monthly gain of 187,000 jobs for the first 9 months of 2000 (and 229,000 new jobs per month average for all of 1999). The unemployment rate rose to 4.2 percent for January 2001 from 4 percent for December 2000, and with layoffs expected to increase in the coming months, the unemployment rate may move beyond 4.5 percent, and perhaps to as high as 5 percent later this year.
Widespread job loss
leads to feelings of uncertainty
and insecurity among
jobholders, especially older
workers who typically
suffer larger income
losses when displaced.

In fact, many workers have been anxious about losing their jobs even during the high points of the record expansion of the 1990s, and for good reason. Despite the low overall level of unemployment throughout this period, job loss and turnover in the labor markets have been prevalent. For many workers, job loss imposes substantial costs, not only during spells of unemployment but also afterwards, if they are forced to take a cut in pay in their new jobs.
The relatively high level of job turnover in the US economy-among the highest in the world-has its benefits. Flexible labor markets facilitate the rapid redeployment of labor to sectors such as high-tech, where it is highly valued and much in demand. Young workers benefit from easy turnover, as they gain experience and skills and find better matches with employers.
But labor market churning has its downsides as well. Widespread job loss leads to feelings of uncertainty and insecurity among jobholders, especially older workers who typically suffer larger income losses when displaced. Nervous workers have less reason to show loyalty to firms and morale suffers when workers fear they might be readily laid off. For similar reasons, many Americans are hesitant about government efforts to further reduce trade barriers, which they believe places American jobs (and wages) at risk. In a recent poll conducted by the Pew Research Center for People and the Press, 78 percent of respondents answered that "protecting the jobs of American workers" should have top priority in deciding US policies about trading with other countries.
We propose two benefit
programs: 1) wage insurance and
2) subsidies for health insurance
for qualifying displaced
workers upon reemployment.

Continued worker anxiety clearly was one of the reasons why, even in the midst of a record-setting economic expansion, the Clinton administration failed in its 1997 and 1998 efforts to convince Congress to give the president "fast-track" trade negotiating authority. Among other factors, worker anxiety fueled the protests against the World Trade Organization in Seattle in 1999 and against the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in Washington, DC, and Prague in 2000. Job insecurity helps explain the political resonance of organized labor's insistence that any new trade agreements with less developed countries contain certain guaranteed or enhanced "labor standards." More broadly, fears of job loss account for surveys showing weak public commitment to further liberalization of barriers to foreign trade and investment.1
The Bush administration has signaled that it wants to reach new trade agreements-in large part because other nations will form trade blocs among themselves if the United States does not push the liberalization agenda. But the current economic slowdown will make it more difficult than ever to achieve success on the trade front. Also, an anxious electorate may be less likely to embrace the kind of market-oriented policies that require entitlement reform.
Looser monetary policy by the Federal Reserve over the next few months should dampen the severity of the slowdown and thus reduce the nervousness among workers. But as the continued worker anxiety of the 1990s has demonstrated, in an increasingly global economy good times are not enough to ease worker concerns that competition from abroad threatens their jobs or their wages. Economic argument and evidence are not likely to reduce worker concerns either, despite the widespread conclusion that trade ranks behind technological change and immigration as a source of job loss and declining real wages of less-educated workers. Without strong public support, it is unlikely that sufficient political support (or domestic consensus) can be built for restarting dialogue on trade liberalization and open markets, which is why federal policymakers should aim to implement programs that address worker anxiety and encourage rapid reemployment.
Accordingly, we propose here two benefit programs that would do precisely that: 1) wage insurance and 2) subsidies for health insurance for qualifying displaced workers upon reemployment. At recent levels of unemployment, the total annual cost of these two programs is projected at roughly $3 billion to $3.5 billion, even if the unemployment rate should rise to the 5 percent range. In our view, the economic and political benefits that these programs promise are well above the costs, and such costs are readily affordable, given sizeable projected federal surpluses.
Even in Good Times, Workers Have Had Reasons to Be Anxious
Data from the Mass Layoff Statistics (MLS) program, a joint project of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and state employment security agencies, reveal a considerable amount of job loss throughout the economy, even during this record expansion. The MLS program counts as a mass layoff a job loss action associated with 50 or more worker claims against an establishment's unemployment insurance account during a 5-week period.
In 1999, 1.15 million workers lost their jobs through mass layoffs, down only a fraction from the 1.18 million total in 1996. Given the drop in the unemployment rate from a 5.4 percent annual average for 1996 to 4.2 percent for 1999, the level of mass layoffs remains stubbornly high. The same is true for permanent layoffs (excluding the end of seasonal or temporary jobs), which numbered about one-half million in both 1999 and 1996.2 The fact that job turnover remains high despite the low national unemployment rate gives many workers ample reason to be anxious about job security despite the strong economy.
Trade liberalization is often the
focal point for anxiety about job
insecurity, and job loss is costly
for workers displaced from
manufacturing industries where
import competition is strong.

Not surprisingly, less-educated workers have faced the highest risk of losing a job, although their rate of job loss (12 percent) in the hot job market of the late 1990s was not much different from the late 1980s, also a period of healthy demand for labor. However, job loss rates among workers with higher levels of education increased in the early 1990s and by 1997-99 stood at nearly 7 percent, as compared with 5.4 percent for 1987-89.3
Losing a job is a traumatic experience. Workers not only lose income when they are unemployed, but many often suffer a drop in their earnings after finding new jobs.4 Older workers-who tend to be less flexible adapting to new production techniques or who lack the educational background to transfer to well-paid service economy jobs-bear the greatest losses. According to the February 1998 Displaced Worker Survey, workers aged 45 to 64 years experienced earnings losses averaging 12 percent. In contrast, workers aged 25 to 34 years actually increased their earnings, on average, by 5.5 percent after losing a job.5
Trade liberalization is often a focal point for anxiety about job insecurity, and job loss is costly for workers displaced from manufacturing industries where import competition is strong: on average, weekly earnings on the new job are about 17 percent lower than on the old job. However, this large average loss masks considerable variation: 34 percent of displaced workers in these industries report earning the same or more post-displacement as they earned before the job loss, while 25 percent reported earnings losses of 30 percent or more. These earnings losses are large, but it is critically important to note that they are not much different from the average earnings losses for all displaced manufacturing workers (16 percent).6
Job displacement can result from a number of factors: technological change, downsizing, restructuring, changes in consumer demand, and changes in public policy (trade liberalization and environmental regulation are two examples). Yet one of the most important findings of recent research is that for most displaced manufacturing workers, what matters is the kind of job lost and the kind of job regained, not why the job was lost. If workers and consequences are alike among the various causes of job loss including increasing foreign competition, technological change, and downsizing, then policymakers need to consider adjustment policy for all displaced workers, not just those displaced by trade.
Compensating Unemployed Workers
Aside from their own assets and other family members' earnings, unemployed workers currently have one primary source of income to tide them over until they find a new job: unemployment insurance (UI). Unemployment insurance, introduced in 1935 as part of the Social Security Act during the second wave of New Deal legislation, is an essential federal policy tool that serves two crucial functions. First, it cushions the economic losses suffered by workers who are laid off through no fault of their own. Second, the significant jump in compensation payments during a recession acts as an automatic fiscal stabilizer, helping to sustain aggregate consumption-and the overall economy-when joblessness increases.
Since 1974, UI has been supplemented for eligible workers for whom it can be documented that increasing imports have contributed importantly to their displacement. Under the most recent version of the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) Act, qualified workers may gain an additional 52 weeks of UI payments, provided they are enrolled in an approved training program. A similar program, the North American Free Trade Agreement Transitional Adjustment Assistance (NAFTA-TAA) program, was created in 1993. For eligibility, workers must prove that they lost their job because of increased imports from, or a shift in production to, either Canada or Mexico. The UI, TAA, and NAFTA-TAA programs are administered by state unemployment offices.
The federal government makes a modest contribution to fund UI (states bear the rest of the cost) and pays all of the expenses associated with TAA and NAFTA-TAA. In the last half of the 1990s-as the unemployment rate drifted down from about 5.5 percent to roughly 4 percent-total UI benefit payments have been generally stable at about $20 billion per year. TAA and NAFTA-TAA payments have been far lower, generally less than $300 million annually.7
Not everyone who is counted as unemployed qualifies for UI: only those who are laid off or otherwise involuntarily released from their job can receive unemployment compensation. These workers account for only about 45 percent of the unemployed. The rest of the people whom the Labor Department classifies as unemployed include those who are between jobs voluntarily (in recent years about 10-15 percent of the total) and those just entering or reentering the labor market as new jobseekers (40-45 percent of the unemployed). The share of workers who qualify for TAA and NAFTA-TAA is far lower.
The existing safety net for replacing the lost income of displaced workers has a number of holes, which aggravate workers' anxiety about the prospect of losing their jobs. Perhaps most important, the payments under UI are limited, generally replacing a little less than 50 percent of the average worker's previous salary.
[Trade Adjustment Assistance]
fails to address the most critical
component of worker costs: earnings
losses after reemployment.

In 1999, the average weekly earnings of a production worker in wage and salary employment was $457 while the average weekly unemployment check was $212.8 Most eligible workers receive payments for just 6 months. Fortunately, this eligibility period is longer than the average spell of unemployment, which has been between 3 and 4 months over the past 5 years. However, the compensation payments do not help workers who suffer a loss in earnings after they take a new job. Moreover, although all laid-off workers now have the right to purchase unsubsidized health insurance from their former employer if it was offered when they were employed, many jobless workers cannot take advantage of this guarantee. The loss of income during unemployment spells and the high cost of premiums mean that many workers have a tough time purchasing health insurance while continuing to put food on the table, pay rent or utilities, finance a mortgage, and pay for other costs of daily living.
Workers who receive additional compensation under TAA must be enrolled in an approved training program. The evidence that these training programs are useful is weak, at best, and understandably so. Workers have no guarantees of employment when they finish the training programs. For this reason, there is broad consensus that the best training is delivered on the job, or if workers are already at a job, then in supplemental programs that workers help pay for themselves and choose to attend at night or other off-hours.
A New Safety Net for Displaced Workers
There is a better way to provide a safety net to displaced workers-regardless of the reason for their job loss-and, at the same time, encourage workers to accept new employment offers more rapidly and to gain the training they need at their new jobs. This strengthened safety net should help reduce workers' anxieties about losing their current jobs, and thus diminish worker opposition to further trade liberalization that promises lower prices and broader product choice that benefits society as a whole.
Our proposal has two components: 1) an offer of "wage insurance" upon reemployment, and 2) subsidies for medical insurance, in lieu of the current TAA (whose benefits Congress may nonetheless be willing to offer as an option to the compensation we have suggested). In either case, workers would still be eligible to collect unemployment insurance if they otherwise qualify.
To qualify for our proposed supplemental wage insurance benefit, workers need only document that they have been "displaced" according to criteria similar to the operational definition of displacement used by the BLS in its Displaced Worker Surveys (plant or company closed or moved, elimination of position or shift, insufficient work); that they had served at their previous job for a minimum period of time-we suggest two years; and that they have suffered an earnings loss (from old job to new job) that can be documented through state unemployment insurance offices and employer quarterly earnings withholding reports. A broader population would be eligible for our proposed health insurance subsidy: all full-time displaced workers would receive the subsidy, for up to 6 months, or until they found a new job (whichever is earlier). To prevent job churning, workers could be limited to receiving the subsidy no more frequently than once during any 3- to 4-year period.
Wage insurance would work as follows: eligible workers would receive some fraction of their wage loss-which could vary by age and tenure of the worker-for up to 2 years following the initial date of job loss, but would begin to be paid only when workers found a new job. The payments would be administered through state UI. In the cost estimates we show here, we have assumed that the average payment is 50 percent of the earnings loss, and is provided only for workers whose previous and new jobs were full-time (benefits could be extended to workers reemployed in part-time jobs, with payments adjusted on an hourly basis). For example, a displaced worker who once earned $40,000 and found a new job paying just $30,000 would receive $5,000 (in quarterly payments) until 2 years after the initial layoff. We also recommend that the annual payments should be capped, perhaps at something like $10,000. Our plan would be available to all qualifying displaced workers, not just those displaced by trade.
Table 1 provides estimates of the numbers of reemployed displaced workers who would have qualified for both the wage insurance and health insurance benefits under our proposed program, during 1997 and 1999, based on the Displaced Worker Surveys for those years. The table shows that of displaced workers reemployed full-time, approximately 20 percent would have had at least 2 years' tenure on their previous job and suffered a wage loss in taking new employment (many more workers actually obtained a job that paid more than the previous job).
Table 2 reports the estimated budgetary cost for compensating the qualified workers estimated in Table 1, again for both 1997 and 1999. Assuming a 50 percent replacement and subsidy rate, the table indicates that our wage insurance and health insurance program would have cost about $2.9 billion in 1999, when the national unemployment rate averaged 4.2 percent. The total cost of the two programs would have been $3.6 billion in 1997 when the national unemployment rate was 4.9 percent. Total costs would increase by about $200 million each year if workers reemployed part-time continue to receive health insurance benefits.
Given the recent and expected slowdown in overall economic activity, this last number is close to the possible average for 2001, assuming that the unemployment rate actually averages 4.9 percent this year, which now seems a bit high (technically, the current dollar cost would be approximately 10 percent higher than 1997 due to inflation). The health insurance program would be considerably more expensive if extended to all workers eligible for UI rather than just "displaced" workers.
We believe several arguments support the kind of extended safety net we have outlined. One is that the program addresses real needs that many workers have, whether they are currently displaced or fear future displacement. Second, the structure of the program-which triggers the benefits only when workers obtain new employment-contains incentives for workers to accept new jobs more quickly, and in a broader scope, than they do now. Third, the program in effect subsidizes retraining on the job, where it is likely to be far more useful than in a training program where reemployment prospects are uncertain.
Finally, reducing worker anxiety should reduce worker opposition to trade liberalization and globalization more broadly. There is ample evidence that opinions become more favorable toward trade liberalization when it is linked to worker adjustment assistance.9 For example, a recent survey by the Program on International Policy Attitudes reports that roughly two-thirds of the respondents agreed with the statement, "I favor free trade, and I believe it is necessary for the government to have programs to help workers who lose their jobs"; only 18 percent advocated free trade in the absence of such help.10 This view about worker assistance is also reflected in the findings the Trade Deficit Review Commission reported in late 2000. The Commission could not agree on anything about the trade deficit-including what causes it and how to remedy it-but did agree on exploring a wage insurance program for displaced workers as a way of mitigating opposition to trade liberalization.
Objections to our suggested programs can be easily met. The total cost, less than $4 billion, might have been a major obstacle when federal deficits were high and growing but is not a problem now, and in any event would be small in relation to the more than $20 billion that is now spent on unemployment insurance, as well as to the tax cuts that are being contemplated for many upper income Americans. Furthermore, these costs are a tiny fraction of the $500 billion in estimated benefits for the United States from freer trade.11
Some economists have suggested that wage insurance in particular creates a "moral hazard" for employers, encouraging them to pay less because they know that workers will be partially compensated by the federal government. We do not believe this effect is likely to be significant given the large numbers of new entrants into the labor force who do not receive these benefits, coupled with unemployed workers who do not qualify for the program. The United States has a large labor market where wages are set by overall supply and demand.
Conclusion: Government Support for Workers
Trade Adjustment Assistance, up for renewal or extension this year, can no longer be the centerpiece of displaced worker adjustment policy. Critics of TAA can be found across the political spectrum, because the program does not work. It fails to address the most critical component of worker costs: earnings losses after reemployment. It also works as a disincentive to rapid reemployment.
Our proposal focuses on reemployment while acknowledging and helping to mitigate the losses in earnings that workers experience when they lose a job for reasons unrelated to their own performance. Wage insurance, in particular, should encourage workers to be reemployed rapidly while improving their access to on-the-job training.
Free trade and open markets play important roles in facilitating economic growth while restraining inflation. But open engagement with the world does not help everyone. The government must offer real help to workers who are hurt in the process. Political leaders should not be surprised to find that public support for further trade liberalization is weak until that help arrives.
Table 1: Displaced workers in the late 1990s
 

1997


1999

Unemployment rate, average for the year

4.9 percent


4.2 percent

Displaced workers

8,521,883


8,005,659

Workers displaced from full-time jobs

6,416,460


6,280,796

Reemployed displaced workers

5,212,776


4,958,590

Reemployed displaced workers (full-time)

3,694,375


3,647,698

Displaced workers eligible for wage insurance

797,240


651,391

 

 


 

Workers ineligible for wage insurance

 


 


Reemployed but less than 2 years job tenure on old job


1,383,465


1,509,891


New job earnings greater than or equal to old job earnings


1,327,798


1,308,893

Other1

185,873


177,523

 

 


 

Mean annual earnings loss of qualified participants2

$8,862


$7,513

Mean annual earnings on old job of qualified participants

$39,526


$42,334

1. Other for 1997: Respondents with four or more jobs since displacement or no response to number of jobs held: 111,179. No reported earnings, wasn't working in last year: 12,568. New job after end of 1997: 62,126. Other for 1998: Respondents with four or more jobs since displacement or no response to number of jobs held: 102,455. No reported earnings, wasn't working in last year: 0. New job after end of 1999: 75,068.
2. Due to lower earnings on new job. This estimate does not include income loss due to unemployment.
Source: Authors' calculations from 1998 and 2000 Displaced Worker Surveys, supplements to the February Current Population Survey. Estimates are in current year dollars.
Table 2: Displaces Worker Wage Insurance Program, Annual Cost Estimates
 

Amount of benefit 
(in billions of current dollars)

 

30 percent


50 percent


70 percent

1997

 


 


 


Wage Insurance Benefit
(capped at $10,000)


2.04


2.96


3.63


Wage Insurance Benefit
(capped at $20,000)


2.22


3.49


4.62


Wage Insurance Benefit
(not capped)


2.28


3.79


5.31

 
 
 
 

Health Insurance Benefit1


.48


.79


1.11

 

 


 


 

1999

 


 


 


Wage Insurance Benefit
(capped at $10,000)


1.53


2.26


2.81


Wage Insurance Benefit
(capped at $20,000)


1.67


2.63


3.47


Wage Insurance Benefit
(not capped)

1.76
2.94
4.11
 
 
 
 

Health Insurance Benefit1


.45


.74


1.04

1. Workers who are displaced from full-time jobs, regardless of tenure on old job, receive health benefits equal to a percentage of the average health premium paid by employers for a 6-month period following displacement. If workers are reemployed within the 6-month period the health benefit ends on their date of reemployment.
Source: Authors' calculations from 1998 and 2000 Displaced Worker Surveys, supplements to the February
Current Population Survey. Estimates are in current year dollars.
Notes
1. Scheve, Kenneth F. and Matthew J. Slaughter, Globalization and the Perceptions of American Workers, Institute for International Economics, March 2001.
2. Hyson, Rosemary and James R Spletzer, 2001. "Large-scale Layoffs, Employment Dynamics and Firm Survival," Bureau of Labor Statistics working paper, January.
3. Farber, Henry S., "Job Loss in the United States, 1981-99," Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University, 2001.
4. Many displaced workers experience a decline in earnings before their job loss. Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde and Daniel Sullivan, The Costs of Worker Dislocation, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1993.
5. Hipple, Steve, 1999. "Worker Displacement in the mid-1990s," Monthly Labor Review, July, pp. 15-32. These averages were calculated for workers who had three or more years of tenure when they were displaced from a full-time job during 1995-96 and who were reemployed in a full-time job in February 1998.
6. Kletzer, Lori G., What are the costs of job loss from import-competing industries? Institute for International Economics, forthcoming 2001.
7. Storey, James R., 1999, "Trade Adjustment Insurance for Workers: Proposals for Renewal and Reform," Congressional Research Service Issue Brief No. 98023 (May 23) and U.S. General Accounting Office, 2000, "Trade Adjustment Assistance: Trends, Outcomes, and Management Issues in Dislocated Worker Programs," GAO-01-59, October.
8. Economic Report of the President (January 2001), Tables B-45 and B-47.
9. Scheve, Kenneth F. and Matthew J. Slaughter, Globalization and the Perceptions of American Workers, Institute for International Economics, March 2001.
10. Kull, Steven. 2000. Americans on Globalization: A Study of U.S. Public Attitudes, Program on International Policy Attitudes, March 28.
11. This estimated increase in US economic welfare assumes global free trade, with all post-Uruguay Round trade barriers completely removed. See Brown, Drusilla K., Alan V. Deardorff, and Robert M. Stern, "CGE Modeling and Analysis of Multilateral and Regional Negotiating Options," in R.M. Stern, ed., Issues and Options for U.S.-Japan Trade Policies. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, forthcoming 2001.

The author is director of the Institute for International Economics and has authored 27 books on a wide range of international economic issues. He was formerly assistant secretary of the Treasury (1977-81) and assistant for international economic affairs to the National Security Council (1969-71), and chaired APEC's Eminent Persons Group (1993-95) throughout its existence. A slightly edited version of this policy brief first appeared in the February 2001 issue of Asia, Inc. The eighth annual APEC leaders' meeting in Brunei in November 2000 may have marked a turning point in the life of the organization. It clearly set the stage for major progress at the October 2001 summit in Shanghai during the year of Chinese chairmanship of the APEC.The first four APEC summits produced spectacular results. At Seattle in 1993, the leaders of the Pacific Rim countries gathered for the first time in history and decided to create "a community of Asia-Pacific economies." At Bogor in 1994, they commited to "free and open trade and investment in the region by 2010/2020." At Osaka in 1995, they laid out a detailed action agenda for realizing those plans. At Subic in 1996, their Information Technology Agreement (ITA) freed trade in the world's most dynamic sector and produced a corresponding global accord 3 weeks later in the World Trade Organization (WTO).More recently, however, the APEC summits have been much less successful. The Vancouver summit in 1997 failed to address the burgeoning financial crisis. The Kuala Lumpur summit in 1998 broke the momentum of trade liberalization by terminating the effort to open up additional sectors. At the Auckland summit in 1999 hopes were staked on APEC leadership of a new multilateral round in the WTO. But APEC's own disarray contributed largely to the debacle at Seattle 3 months later.The Brunei summit thus took place at an inauspicious moment in the history of the APEC. As a result of the recent unhappy record, the meeting faced an enormous and crucial challenge: to at least halt the negative momentum of APEC's decline and, hopefully, restart the engine of progress.Leaders and ministers [at the Brunei summit] candidly recognized the failure of their Auckland initiative toward launching a new multilateral round in the WTO and took several remedial steps.There were no spectaculars at Brunei. There were, however, a number of solid achievements that together may mark a new era of positive progress for the institution and hence for cooperation across the Asia-Pacific region.APEC now operates across a wide range of topics. It holds hundreds of meetings every year-many at the ministerial level-on virtually all subjects of economic interest to its members. It is making steady, if slow and unspectacular, progress toward forming the "community of Asia-Pacific economies" called for by the leaders at their first meeting in Seattle.But APEC, from its outset, has made its reputation primarily through trade liberalization. Its initial summit, in Seattle in 1993, galvanized a successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiation in the GATT by demonstrating to the Europeans, who had held those talks hostage for almost 3 years, that the countries of the Pacific Rim had an alternative if the global system faltered. The APEC leaders set the most ambitious trade goal in history at Bogor by aiming for free trade in the region. Their ITA freed over $500-billion worth of trade in goods and services. The credibility of APEC turns largely on its ability to maintain its momentum in this central area of activity.Brunei marked an important milestone on this path for two reasons. First, the leaders and ministers candidly recognized the failure of their Auckland initiative toward launching a new multilateral round in the WTO and took several remedial steps. Lead by Trade Minister Rafidah Aziz of Malaysia, they acknowledged that it would be fatuous to simply renew their call to launch a round without addressing the sharp differences between them that helped torpedo the prior effort to do so at Seattle. Hence they agreed that it was essential to work out an agenda for a new round before it could be credibly initiated.The leaders then took that agreement a step farther, providing a valuable reminder of why the annual summits are so vital to the success of APEC. They concurred with their ministers that substantive agreement on an agenda had to precede the launch of a WTO round but, as keen politicians, also recognized that a failure to renew political momentum for the launch itself would be widely viewed as a step backward for APEC's traditional strong support for the multilateral system. Hence they strongly called for the acceleration of the timetable, seeking agreement on "a balanced and sufficiently broad-based agendaas soon as possible in 2001" and then on the launch of the round before the end of 2001.The Brunei meeting did not resolve the substantive differences that divided the APEC governments at Seattle. It did, however, create a process and a schedule for doing so. It thus neatly "teed up" the issue for rapid resolution during this year. This schedule is particularly important because the new administration in the United States has indicated that trade will be central to its foreign policy. Its emphasis on initiating serious negotiations to create a Free Trade Area of the Americas must be linked to similar steps at the multilateral level in the WTO and with its Asia-Pacific partners in APEC.Brunei's second major trade initiative, which may have been more important in the short run, related to the spate of subregional trade agreements (SRTAs) that are now being pursued throughout the Asia Pacific (and elsewhere in the world). The leaders at Bogor, immediately after setting their goal of "free and open trade and investment in the region," recognized that it was essential that all SRTAs-of which there were already three: AFTA, Australia-New Zealand, and NAFTA-needed to be fully consistent with the broader APEC (and WTO) systems if conflict was to be avoided. They in fact asked our Eminent Persons Group to remain in existence for another year largely to address this issue. We suggested a set of principles for "open subregionalism" in our final report in 1995.This issue has become more important with the historic shifts of trade policy in the three leadingBrunei's second major trade initiativerelated to the spate of subregional trade agreements (SRTAs) that are now being pursued throughout the Asia Pacific (and elsewhere in the world).Asian economies. Japan, after relying solely on the multilateral system throughout the postwar period, has now begun to aggressively negotiate bilateral FTAs, starting with Singapore, Korea, and Mexico. Korea has made a similar move, negotiating actively with Chile as well as Japan. China, in addition to joining the WTO, proposed an FTA with ASEAN at the latest "ASEAN + 3" summit in Singapore, just two weeks after Brunei. The proposal was quickly converted into a study of a full-fledged East Asia Free Trade Area that would include Japan and Korea as well. Any such entity would of course immediately rank alongside the European Union and any Free Trade Area of the Americas and transform the global economy into a three-bloc world for the first time in history.It has thus become crucial for APEC to credibly address the relationship between its own vision and the new SRTAs, whether small and bilateral (like New Zealand-Singapore) or large and plurilateral (like a possible East Asia Free Trade Area). A failure to do so would, at a minimum, create a misunderstanding in the United States (and elsewhere) of the East Asian steps. One may recall the concern of Secretary of State James A. Baker III that such initiatives might "draw a line down the middle of the Pacific" and undermine the most basic principles of APEC.The SRTAs could, however, play a very positive role in the future of APEC. At the outset of APEC's trade strategy, a number of key observers believed that the best route to "free and open trade in the region" would in fact be a series of SRTAs-perhaps centered on the extension of the North American Free Trade Agreement (which had just come into effect at that time) to East Asian countries-through which liberalization in the region would be ratcheted up until the full Bogor goal was achieved. That approach was rejected at the time but the three strategies that APEC subsequently tried-"concerted multi-lateralism" and the Individual Action Plans, a generalization of the ITA success through Early Voluntary Sectoral Liberalization, and championing a new multilateral round in the WTO-have all failed.It might be time to go "back to the future," using the SRTAs as a means to reduce barriers seriatim across the region as individual countries feel compelled to join one or more of the growing array of agreements to avoid new discrimination against their own trade.Hence it might be time to go "back to the future," using the SRTAs as a means to reduce barriers seriatim across the region as individual countries feel compelled to join one or more of the growing array of agreements to avoid new discrimination against their own trade.For both defensive and offensive reasons, it is thus critical for APEC to address these interrelationships. A major success at Brunei was that the leaders reportedly did address them quite extensively. They did not come to any formal agreements, nor could they be expected to do so at this early stage, but they again "teed up" the topic for further attention at Shanghai-perhaps on an agreement on "nonbinding principles on open subregionalism" along the lines of the ideas offered by the EPG in 1995.There was also useful discussion of SRTAs on the side during the official meetings at Brunei, especially on the distinction between those that were fully consistent with broader APEC norms (such as Singapore-New Zealand) and those that appeared to be heading in an inconsistent direction (such as Japan-Singapore, whose initial draft violates the principle of "comprehensive coverage" by excluding agriculture and fails to adopt a 2010 deadline). Many of those discussions took place at the APEC CEO Summit, which brought together several hundred top business leaders of the region to interact with the official delegations and participate actively in the proceedings. Such business involvement is of great importance for APEC, both to point it toward pragmatic "deliverables" that provide tangible support for trade and investment and to generate constituencies that will support APEC within the member economies' domestic political processes. Brunei's CEO session was extremely successful and represented another valuable contribution to the evolution of the APEC process.The first APEC summit of the 21st century could thus have been an important milestone in the history of the institution and of Asia-Pacific cooperation more broadly. The smallest of the member economies performed admirably and well above expectations. Brunei set the stage for China-the largest member economy-to chair the institution in 2001, as it has already begun to do with its characteristic vigor and creativity. After the hesitations of the late 1990s, APEC may now be back on track.

Although many deny it, a linkage between trade policy and labor standards clearly exists.1 The International Labor Organization (ILO), long ignored and belittled, is suddenly popular with various constituents who desperately want to deflect pressure to incorporate labor standards in trade agreements and the World Trade Organization (WTO). As a result, the ILO today is getting significantly more attention, more political support, and more resources to deal with core labor standards, especially child labor. In 1998, with strong support from the United States, other developed country governments, and key representatives of employers and workers, the ILO adopted a new Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work. In 1999, the ILO approved a new convention to combat the worst forms of child labor, a convention that is being ratified at the fastest rate in ILO history. This year, for the first time, the ILO invoked Article 33 of its constitution in an effort to compel Burma to abolish forced labor.

This brief is a preliminary draft of a paper commissioned by the Commonwealth Secretariat for presentation to a Conference on Developing Countries and the Global Financial Architecture organized by the Commonwealth Secretariat and the World Bank in London on June 22-23, 2000. The author is indebted to C. Fred Bergsten, Morris Goldstein, Stephany Griffith-Jones, and Kevin Morrison for comments on a previous draft.© Institute for International Economics. All rights reserved.
IntroductionMany of the discussions on a new international financial architecture that were spawned by the east Asian crisis have dealt with the future role of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). This policy brief starts by summarizing the recommendations of five recent reports and one speech, and the reasoning that lies behind them. These recommendations are divided into four major areas: 1) the scope of Fund activities, 2) surveillance, 3) lending, and 4) governance (on which topic I also summarize the views of a recent academic paper). I offer my own verdict on the first three of these topics in the last section of this brief.The first of the five reports considered was jointly published by the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies in Geneva and the Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR) in London. The authors were Jose De Gregorio, Barry Eichengreen, Takatoshi Ito, and Charles Wyplosz (1999). The report also contains brief accounts of alternative reform proposals, by Kiichi Miyazawa, Jeffrey Sachs, Sebastian Edwards, France, the United Kingdom, and Italy, and of the idea of regional funds. It was discussed at a conference held in Geneva in May 1999, which is also reported in the volume. This will be referred to as the Geneva Report.The second report is that of an Independent Task Force sponsored by the Council on Foreign Relations (1999). This task force was jointly chaired by Carla Hills and Peter Peterson, with my colleague Morris Goldstein as project director and 23 other luminaries of the American internationalist establishment (including C. Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute for International Economics) as members. This will be referred to as the CFR Report. It contained eight statements of Dissenting Views, but all members signed the main report.The third report was commissioned by the G-24 and written by Montek Ahluwalia in 1999. It is published by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in the latest volume of its series of publications of G-24 studies. It will be referred to as the Ahluwalia Report.The fourth report is that of the International Financial Institution [sic] Advisory Commission established by the US Congress and chaired by Allan Meltzer, with an additional ten members who included academics Charles Calomiris, Jerome Levinson, and Jeffrey Sachs, businessmen, politicians, and think tank Directors C. Fred Bergsten of the Institute for International Economics and Edwin Feulner of the Heritage Foundation. Despite the singular "Institution" in its title, the terms of reference covered the World Bank, the three regional development banks, the World Trade Organization (WTO), and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), in addition to the IMF. This was issued in March 2000, and will be referred to as the IFIAC report. It was accompanied by two "Supporting Statements" arguing that it did not go far enough in gutting the international financial institutions (IFI), a Joint Minority Statement by four members (including Bergsten and Levinson), three of whom did not sign the main report, and two additional dissents by two members of the minority (one of whom was Levinson) who did not sign the main report.The fifth report is that of a task force established by the Overseas Development Council in Washington which reported in April 2000. This was cochaired by John Sewell and Sylvia Saborio, directed by Kevin Morrison, and comprised a further 11 members from academia, think tanks, and NGOs, "who agreed with the overall direction and recommendations of the report, but not necessarily with all statements and emphases." I was a member of this Task Force, as were Nancy Birdsall and Joe Stiglitz. This will be referred to as the ODC Report.The degree of consensus reflected in these five sources is rather remarkable. All reflect a concern with mission creep, and urge the Fund to focus on its core competence.The speech included is, of course, that given by US Secretary of the Treasury Lawrence Summers at the London Business School last December (Summers 1999).These six works include the views advanced by an international group of academics, by a collection of Americans who qualify as the great and the good, by a leading developing country official writing on behalf of the Group of 24 developing countries, by a mixed group of Americans writing a report for the US Congress, by another mixed group of predominantly American composition concerned with the problems of developing countries, and by the US Secretary of the Treasury. Although there is obviously some bias toward American sources, I believe this provides a reasonable cross section of informed thought on which to develop a set of proposals.
The Scope of the FundNot all of the six documents being surveyed address all four of the topics into which I am dividing the discussion. The desirable scope of Fund activities, for example, is not touched on by the Geneva Report.The CFR Report also treats the topic relatively lightly, but it does urge the Fund (and, for that matter, the World Bank) to go "back to basics." It argues (p.115) that the Fund is still needed to help countries resolve payments problems in an internationally responsible way, to address liquidity crises, and to act as a crisis manager or convenor, and elsewhere it emphasizes the Fund's role in crisis prevention. It also argues that "the IMF is losing its focus and reducing its effectiveness by doing too much. Specifically, the IMF should limit the scope of its conditionality to monetary, fiscal, exchange rate, and financial-sector policies" (p.116). But its surveillance needs to be concerned with monitoring compliance with financial standards, as well as macro fundamentals.The Ahluwalia Report (p.22) dismisses the case for a merger between the Fund and the Bank on the grounds that there is an important and distinctive role for the Fund in dealing with crises, both in prevention (via surveillance) and in management (via financing). The report also argues that "such financing does not have to be long-term and certainly not concessional." It also states that the "Fund should focus more sharply on sources of instability in the international financial system and on handling balance-of-payments problems which are either short-term or systemic in nature. It could even be argued that financing operations related to chronic balance-of-payments problems of low-income countries, e.g. the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facilities (ESAF) andHeavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiativeshould perhaps be shifted to the Bank, with cooperation from the Fund being available on technical matters."The Executive Summary of the IFIAC Report declares that "the IMF should continue as crisis manager under new rules that give member countries incentives to increase the safety and soundness of their financial systems" (p.6). The Report identified three roles that this implied: 1) in serving as quasi-lender of last resort to emerging economies; 2) in collecting, publishing, and disseminating data on member countries; 3) and in providing advice (as opposed to imposing conditionality) relating to economic policy (pp.42-43). It urged an end to long-term loans, and specifically called for closing what it called the "Poverty and Growth Facility" (p.43). It also called for the replacement of conditionality by prequalification, according to principles outlined in the section on lending below.The CFR Report . . . argues that "the IMF is losing its focus and reducing its effectiveness by doing too much. . . ."The ODC Report identified the IMF's core competence as macroeconomic policy, and hence sees its central role as crisis avoidance and, when that fails, promoting speedy recovery from crisis. It argued that this implied that its lending should be restricted to short-term liquidity lending in macroeconomic crises, and called for moving the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) to the Bank. It should retain a role in the poorest countries, but only in the context of emergency lending, as in other member countries. The Fund should maintain its role in surveillance, geared toward providing advice that would minimize the probability of crises. But the report argued that statistics should be collected and disseminated by an independent statistical agency, rather than the Fund (or Bank).The Summers speech also urged a focus on core competence (p.5), but it interpreted this rather more widely than the preceding reports. The IMF should promote financial stability within countries, a stable flow of capital between them, and rapid recovery following any financial disruption (p.3). Summers asserted that this points to six critical areas: 1) promoting the flow of information from governments to markets and investors, 2) giving attention to financial vulnerability as well as macroeconomic fundamentals, 3) developing a more selective financing role focused on emergency situations, 4) catalyzing market-based solutions, 5) focusing on growth and poverty reduction in the poorest countries, and 6) modernizing the IMF as an institution.The degree of consensus reflected in these five sources is rather remarkable. All reflect a concern with mission creep, and urge the Fund to focus on its core competence. All see the Fund as having a central role in aiming to prevent financial crises, and in managing them when they nevertheless occur. All wish the Fund to continue to lend in crisis situations. All concur in wishing to maintain surveillance, and none challenge the proposition that this should focus on financial standards and vulnerability as well as traditional macroeconomic fundamentals.Despite the apparent agreement, there is a profound gulf between the IFIAC majority on the one hand, and the other five (and the IFIAC minority as well) on the other, about the value of having an IMF at all. Everyone except the IFIAC majority emphasizes the need for an international institution dedicated to building collaborative macroeconomic policies among countries, to helping avoid crises, and to aiding countries cope with crises that nonetheless occur. They all appear to agree that the world is a lot better off for having built that degree of international collaboration. The IFIAC majority start instead from a concern that IMF lending may promote moral hazard (a phenomenon whose importance "cannot be overstated," according to the report1), and concede only reluctantly (and to the dismay of two of their number) that there may after all be a limited role for the Fund.On more concrete issues the disputed topics would seem to be:· whether the Fund should maintain the PRGF (Summers, yes), whether this should be closed (IFIAC majority report), or whether it should be moved to the Bank (Ahluwalia and ODC); and· whether the collection and dissemination of statistics should be moved to a separate agency, as urged by ODC.
SurveillanceFund surveillance takes two forms: 1) general surveillance of the world economy, as reflected in the biennial publication World Economic Outlook and the annual International Capital Markets Report, and 2) surveillance of individual countries, as undertaken primarily in Article IV consultations. No one seems to have challenged the utility of the former exercise, or to have offered significant suggestions for improving what the Fund does, except the Ahluwalia Report which urges that the Fund should draw on this information in introducing developing-country interests into G-7 discussions. The debate focuses rather on surveillance of individual countries, and how this could be improved to diminish the probability of crises occurring.The Geneva Report suggests that surveillance should seek to identify country vulnerabilities in areas like the banking system, exchange rate policy, reserve levels, or accounting standards, and give countries confidential warnings of these vulnerabilities. It recognizes that the Fund lacks expertise in many of the fields where standards are needed and being developed, and urges the Fund to accept that the standards will be designed by others, with its own role being confined to monitoring, with the use of experts from other institutions in its missions.The CFR Report also suggests that the Fund should focus on each member country's compliance with international financial standards like the Fund's Special Data Dissemination Standard, the Basel Committee's Core Principles of Effective Banking Supervision, and international accounting standards, along with a "viable" exchange rate regime, prudent debt management, etc. Rather than the results being communicated confidentially, however, the report proposes that the Fund should periodically publish a "standards report" that details each country's performance, along with the Article IV reports assessing policies and prospects. It sees the incentive to comply with these standards as being provided by the likelihood of a lower cost of market borrowing, cheaper access to Fund credit when a country has to borrow, and lower capital requirements for bank loans to those countries (pp. 93-97). The Fund should encourage countries with fragile domestic financial sectors and weak prudential frameworks to adopt Chilean-style capital inflow taxes (p.98).There is general enthusiasm for data collection, . . . transparency, publication, and continued surveillance.The Ahluwalia Report declares that surveillance is a core activity of the Fund and recommends that it be strengthened, primarily by increasing the disclosure of key information to financial markets.The IFIAC Report has rather little to say about surveillance, except that the Fund should abandon Article IV consultations for the OECD countries (on the grounds of avoiding costly duplication of effort) and should publish promptly all Article IV consultation reports for other countries (pp. 43-44). It also sees a major function of the Fund as being the collection and prompt publication of data, with a view to keeping market participants well informed (p.43). The Fund should encourage countries either to hard fix their exchange rate, or to float, since intermediate regimes are more subject to crises.The ODC Report also approves of data collection (though arguing that this should be moved to a separate agency) and transparency, but argues that improvement in these directions is unlikely to end crises. It sees a unique role for the Fund in advising countries on macro policy, aimed inter alia at avoiding macroeconomic crises, and normally not based on financial arrangements. It too endorses Fund monitoring of a wide range of standards, while cautioning that the Fund does not have in-house expertise on all of them. It recommends that discussion of Article IV reports be moved from the full Executive Board to the sub-boards comprised of the executive directors (EDs) from particular geographical regions of the world, so as to diminish the work load on the full Board, but with regular reports from the sub-boards to the full Board. This report cautions against enthusiasm for the two-corners exchange rate fad (the notion that every country ought to have either a currency board or a floating exchange rate, but nothing in between).Secretary Summers also favored a Fund role in collecting and disseminating information to investors and markets. Countries should be encouraged to adopt the Special Data Dissemination Standard and the various international codes for sound policies that are being developed, and the Fund's assessment of their compliance with those standards should be released publicly. Surveillance should cover financial vulnerability as well as macro fundamentals, and it should be recognized that this vulnerability is a function of the level of short-term foreign debt and of excessive government granting of guarantees. The Fund should focus on the strength of national balance sheets, for example, by developing a more meaningful measure of reserve adequacy than the traditional reserves/imports ratio. It should draw attention to "the dangers of opening up to short-term capital in the presence of too many domestic guarantees," and should highlight the risks posed by unsustainable exchange rate regimes.
Once again, the degree of consensus exhibited is quite significant. There is general enthusiasm for data collection (if not necessarily by the Fund), transparency, publication, and continued surveillance. This is rather remarkable if one considers how secretive an institution the Fund has traditionally been. Several of the sources explicitly endorse focusing attention on vulnerabilities in the financial system, foreign debt, the various areas in which international standards are being promulgated, and the exchange rate regime, and no one opposes going down that road. There was far more recognition of a possible constructive role for capital inflow taxes than one would have expected to find in these places prior to the East Asian crisis. There remains a disagreement as to whether all intermediate exchange rate regimes are to be condemned as unsustainable, but everyone recognizes that the issue of sustainability is an important one.
LendingThe Geneva Report expressed skepticism about the proposal to "include some form of 'prequalification' for financial support by the IMF" (p.44).2 It saw the appeal of prequalification as lying in a resolution of the problem of moral hazard, since a government could no longer be expected to be bailed out if it ignored warnings of imprudent behavior. But it questioned whether government moral hazard is a real problem (governments suffer enough when they engulf their countries in a crisis to eliminate any incentive to flirt with danger), and also argued that the criteria for prequalification would be arbitrary and the policy would be time-inconsistent (the threat to withhold help from countries that have not prequalified is not credible). The report also declared that the Contingent Credit Line (CCL) created by the IMF in April 1999 suffered from the same drawbacks, plus the danger that dequalifying a country previously qualified could precipitate a crisis. It noted that no country had so far been induced to apply for a CCL (which remains true).The Geneva Report also argued that the Fund's facilities had proliferated excessively and need to be streamlined with a view to making the Fund's emergency lending more transparent, simple, and effective.The Geneva Report also argued that the Fund's facilities had proliferated excessively and need to be streamlined with a view to making the Fund's emergency lending more transparent, simple, and effective (p.48). It applauded the new Supplemental Reserve Facility (the SRF, which can lend exceptionally large sums at a penalty interest rate and was first deployed in South Korea) as a step in the right direction (p.53). It argued that the capital account crises that are now dominant are essentially caused by a lack of liquidity rather than bad fundamentals, and therefore require temporary financing with front-loaded disbursements (though it questioned whether the support need always be large). The Fund support will need to be accompanied either by "cofinancing with the private-sector rollovers and rescheduling" or by a restructuring of external debt obligations in order to keep the size of financial packages within reason. The experience of South Korea in 1997 showed that a standstill could be a useful instrument in bailing in the private sector, but the experience of Mexico in 1982 should also stand as an awful warning that standstills are not a panacea.The CFR Report proposed to draw a sharp distinction between "country crises" and "systemic crises." Finance for the former would be limited to normal access limits (100 percent of quota per year and 300 percent cumulatively), and would be financed from the Fund's existing resources. Systemic crises might be financed from the General Agreement to Borrow (GAB) and the New Agreement to Borrow (NAB) or from a proposed new Contagion Facility that would replace both the CCL and the SRF. The Contagion Facility would be used for victims of contagion in which the payments deterioration reflects developments largely beyond their own control, and would not require a Fund program (p.110). It would be financed by a one-time Special Drawing Rights (SDR) allocation in which all Fund members would donate their newly-allocated SDRs to the Contagion Facility. The report also declared that in extreme cases, where the debt profile is clearly unsustainable, the IMF would require debtors to engage in "good-faith" debt restructuring negotiations with their creditors as a condition of its support (p.102). Those discussions might be facilitated by declaration of a temporary standstill by the debtor. Interest rates on borrowings from the Fund would be lower for countries that made a series of efforts to forestall crises, by complying with the international codes being developed, following sound macro policies, maintaining a viable currency regime and a prudent debt profile, and establishing contingent sources of liquidity support (p.94).The Ahluwalia Report is sympathetic to the Fund acting as a lender of last resort in response to capital account crises, but worries about how such lending is to be financed, and also suggests resorting to a special SDR allocation (p.14) as well as to bigger quotas. In terms of conditionality for such lending, it is sympathetic to prequalification but points to the problem that performance criteria judged adequate prior to a crisis may not still appear to be so after the crisis has erupted (p.16). It suggests a compromise solution in which prequalification would entitle a country to a first tranche almost automatically, but subsequent drawings would require conditionality. It notes the danger that withdrawal of cover before a crisis could precipitate a loss of confidence that would provoke the very crisis that the arrangement was designed to avoid.The IFIAC Report identifies the first of the Fund's responsibilities as being "to act as a quasi-lender of last resort to solvent emerging economies" (p.42). The first point to note is that this is the only lending window that the report discusses: it appears to preclude not just lending to industrial countries, but also to the poorer developing countries that are not included in the term "emerging economies." Indeed, it specifically calls for closing the PRGF, currently the main instrument for lending to those countries (p.43), and it rules out lending for nonfinancial emergencies, such as famines (p.47). The report goes on to state that "except in unusual circumstances, where the crises poses [sic] a threat to the global economy, loans would be only to countries in crises [sic] that have preconditions that establish financial soundness" (p.43). Preconditions would replace conditionality. The preconditions proposed (pp.44-45) are:freedom of entry and operation for foreign financial institutions;well-capitalized commercial banks, preferably with part of the capital in the form of uninsured subordinated debt;regular and timely publication of the maturity structure of outstanding sovereign and guaranteed debt and off-balance sheet liabilities;"a proper fiscal requirement," the nature of which is not specified.Countries that need to borrow before they have been able to fulfill these conditions should be entitled to do so at a "super penalty rate" (all borrowing would be at a penalty rate), and countries that choose not to fulfill the conditions should be ineligible to borrow (p.46). These loans would be of short maturity (e.g. a maximum of 120 days) with only one allowable rollover. The report also goes to considerable length to ensure the priority of IMF claims over all other claims, in analogy with the requirement of collateral in traditional last-resort lending, but in my view this is fussing over a non-problem so I do not propose to waste time on the issue.Perhaps the most important criticism voiced by the minority who did not sign the IFIAC Report concerned the proposed limitations on borrowing from the Fund. They questioned whether it would be possible to fashion a fiscal prequalification requirement that would dispense with the need for conditionality, and also worried that the prequalification approach might preclude lending to countries of great systemic importance (pp.121-22). They commended instead the CFR proposal to grant preferential lending terms to countries that have adopted the Basel Core Principles to strengthen their domestic banking systems (pp. 123-24).3The ODC Report also sees the Fund's lending role as driven by crisis management, but it states explicitly that all countries should be eligible to borrow from the Fund in times of macroeconomic crisis (p.6). In furtherance of the objective of cutting back the IMF to its core competence, which excludes structural issues, it proposes to abolish the Extended Fund Facility and to transfer the PRGF (and hence also responsibility for the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries program) from the Fund to the Bank. The Fund should advise the Bank on the macro conditions to be required for PRGF loans, though without a veto. The report argues that crisis lending should be done through the use of normal standby arrangements, which should be accessible by any member country, with a subsidized interest rate when one of the low-income members borrows. Conditionality should revert to focusing on the basics of macro policy, without the addition of numerous structural conditions such as adorned the East Asian programs and that in the event proved almost entirely irrelevant to nurturing the region's rapid recovery from crisis. The report calls for an effort to make ex ante assessments of the impact of IMF programs on the poor, with a view to trying to reduce their adverse impact. It expresses skepticism about the CCL but calls for maintenance of the Compensatory Financing Facility.The common theme of these six sources is that of the central role of IMF financing in managing crises.Secretary Summers also called for the Fund to focus its financing on emergency situations. It should be a last, not a first, resort; a backstop, not an alternative, to private finance. Longer term lending would be phased out and the core instruments would become the CCL, short-term, standby arrangements for countries with nonsystemic problems, and the SRF, for systemic capital account crises. The penalty rate on SRF lending was a precedent on which to build, although the CCL might have a lower interest rate to encourage countries to qualify and apply. Conditionality will have to fit the specific country circumstances, but it should not intrude in areas irrelevant for restoring stability and growth. However, "the stability of banking systems, issues of social cohesion and inclusion, and the capacity to enforce contractual arrangements" may all be relevant (p.6). He also urged that the official sector should help creditors to recognize their collective interest in maintaining exposure, even when their individual interest is in withdrawing funds, though it will occasionally be necessary to seek less voluntary debt restructuring, and in exceptional cases the IMF should be prepared to lend into arrears.In his remarks on the poorest countries (p.8), Summers lauded the progress made in developing the HIPC as "a fundamentally new framework for the international community's efforts to combat poverty, one that gives the World Bank the lead and the IMF a more tightly focused role." He did not hint at the desirability of moving the PRGF.The common theme of these six sources is the central role of IMF financing in managing crises. There are clearly a number of other ideas that have appealed quite widely without achieving unanimous support: some form of prequalification (though with a strategic difference as to whether failure to prequalify would disqualify a country from borrowing or simply stiffen the terms); shifting the PRGF from the Fund to the Bank; and accompanying IMF crisis lending by some form of payments standstill, at least in certain circumstances.
GovernanceThe Geneva Report argues that the IMF needs greater transparency and more accountability. More decisions should be taken by vote rather than consensus, and the minutes and the votes should be published. Programs should be evaluated both by staff and by outside panels, and again the findings should be published. Above all, the Executive Board should become independent in the same sense that the boards of many central banks are now independent: they should be appointed for multi-year terms and should not receive instructions from the governments that appointed them, the Board should be given an explicit mandate such as promoting economic and financial stability, and the Board should periodically report to what is now the International Monetary and Financial Committee (the IMFC, formerly known as the Interim Committee). A country under discussion should send a representative to sit with the Board. In order to increase its independence from governments, the Fund should borrow in the market rather than acquire its resources from its member governments.The CFR Report also urged more transparency, but Fund governance was not prominent among its concerns. Likewise the Ahluwalia Report said little on this topic, except for arguing against a merger of the Fund and the Bank, and suggesting the establishment of an overarching ministerial committee to supervise them both. The IFIAC Report called for the Fund to be restructured as a smaller institution (p.42), and for more transparency in its accounting (pp.50-51).The ODC Report called for a realignment of the voting power in the Fund to reflect the current weight of economic power, which everyone knows would involve Asian representation growing and that of Europe diminishing. The report recommended reducing the super-majority needed for certain key decisions so as to eliminate the US veto. It also called for a more neutral and transparent process to select the managing director. It recommended that the links between member countries and the Fund should be broadened, so that it might interact with a prime minister's office or a planning ministry (or, in developed countries, an aid ministry) rather than just the finance ministry and central bank. It urged establishment of a small external evaluation unit to report to the IMFC. (The Fund announced the establishment of such a permanent evaluation office just days before the report was published, but reporting to the Executive Board rather than to the IMFC.) The report also urged that data collection and dissemination should be relocated to a separate statistical agency.Once macro policy is reasonably adequate, it is more important for the limited human capital available in the Finance Ministry of the typical poor country to devote its attention to other topics, rather than fussing about inflation targeting or free floating or creating a treasury bill market or whatever the latest macro fad happens to be.It is difficult to detect much common ground between these proposals, beyond the general desire to continue to advance in the direction of greater transparency and openness, although it might be possible to find a widespread desire to reform the process of selecting the managing director after the recent fiasco. Perhaps it is premature to try to reform the Fund's governance before we have decided what we want the Fund to do.4
An Agenda for Reform of the FundAt this stage let us turn to discussing what an agenda for the reform of the Fund might look like. I will not address the issues of governance-we need to decide first what the Fund should do.I find myself in full agreement with the consensus views on the scope of the Fund that were noted at the end of that section. In particular, I endorse the view that the failure to resist the mission creep imposed on it by the G-7, and most specifically by the conditionality that the US Congress attached to the most recent increase in Fund quotas, threatens to undermine the effectiveness of the IMF. The Fund should indeed return to concentrate on its core competence and there seems to be unanimous agreement about what that is (at least among those who do not dismiss the IMF as irreparably incompetent). For example, the G-7 communique of 15 April 2000 stated that "Crisis prevention and response should be at the core of the IMF's work." And everyone seems to agree that that involves both maintaining surveillance with a view to avoiding crises and helping to manage such crises as nonetheless occur.What strikes me as quite extraordinary is that the official world, including Secretary Summers as well as the decisions endorsed at the spring meetings of the IMFC, regard these principles as consistent with the maintenance of the PRGF (and therefore HIPC, whose conditionality is tied to the PRGF) in the Fund. It is one thing to oppose the recommendation of the IFIAC majority to close the PRGF,5 which would imply reducing the resource transfer to the poorest countries. But both the Ahluwalia and the ODC reports suggested an alternative: not closing it, but rather transferring it to the Bank. The argument for this is that the PRGF is not concerned with crisis lending, the area of the Fund's core competence, but with poverty reduction and growth. No one doubts that growth, and the poverty reduction that flows from it, is critically dependent upon disciplined macro policies, and that these lie within the core competence of the Fund. But macro policy is, as emphasized in the Bank's Comprehensive Development Framework, merely one of a number of areas that it is essential to get roughly right if an economy is to grow at anything close to its potential rate. Since the Bank has the core competence in most of these fields, it seems quixotic to place the PRGF in the Fund rather than the Bank. This is an anomaly that can be explained only by history.6Quixotic it may seem to some of us, but the location of the PRGF in the Fund has been vigorously defended by Stanley Fischer in his capacity as acting managing director. As quoted in the Financial Times on 14 April 2000, he said, in response to a question about the recommendation to move the PRGF in the ODC report:there was no reason poor countries should not be able to benefit from the IMF's expertise in macroeconomic policy. The argument strikes me as one which imagines there is a different macroeconomics for poor countries and rich countries Inflation and economic [in]stability is bad for all people.This misinterprets the ODC report, which explicitly argues (p.5) that the Fund has "a unique role in the international system, including in poor countries: to advise countries on how to avoid macroeconomic crisis and to restore stability in the midst of such crises." The ODC report also says baldly: "Stability is an essential condition for growth." In fact the argument is one for eliminating the differential treatment of poor and rich countries in all respects except one: the interest rate at which they are entitled to borrow should they need to borrow in the event of a macro crisis. The Fund would retain the same role in both types of countries, namely surveillance directed to crisis avoidance and short-term lending when avoidance fails. Perhaps there is a good argument for retaining the PRGF in the Fund, but, if so, Fischer did not articulate it.7 Of course, he would have jeopardized his reputation as an outstanding bureaucrat had he acknowledged the logic of transferring a substantial part of his organization's responsibilities to its sibling institution. One can hardly expect him to spearhead this particular reform, but that does not make it an undesirable change.The danger of locating the facility in the Fund is that its traditions will prevent it from treating macro policy as merely one among a number of critical areas. On past experience, one has to expect that the Fund will always make macro stability primus inter pares, whether it deserves to be or not. However, when countries are in crisis, macro stability ought not to be accorded primacy. Once macro policy is reasonably adequate, it is more important for the limited human capital available in the Finance Ministry of the typical poor country to devote its attention to other topics, rather than fussing about inflation targeting or free floating or creating a treasury bill market or whatever the latest macro fad happens to be. If the Fund is in charge, there will be no one to countermand an excessive emphasis on macro perfection at the expense of getting public expenditure priorities right and reforming corporate governance and building up the education system. If the Bank is in charge, the Fund will still have the duty to examine macro policy and will be able to make a case if it sees problems, and if the Bank agrees that macro stability is in jeopardy then it would have the duty to hold up disbursement until policy has been adjusted appropriately. This will ensure both that the Fund cannot be ignored and that countries cannot be deprived of the advice of the Fund. But since another agency will have to agree that macro stability is indeed at risk, the country will be safeguarded against an excessive emphasis on macro stability at the expense of other priorities.It would be sensible to abolish the contingent credit line, while absorbing some of the features of its design into the other facilities designed to allow the Fund to respond to crises.The other argument for relocating the PRGF concerns the time horizon of Fund programs. We know that poverty reduction requires decades rather than the three years allotted to a PRGF program, implying that one must look forward to a succession of such programs and a long-term IMF involvement in development finance under present arrangements. In the past it has always been assumed that Fund involvement should be occasional and episodic rather than a continuing matter, and one may wonder whether confusion between these two roles may not prejudice the Fund's ability to act effectively in the event of a crisis.Supporters of the status quo are likely to argue that the Fund is a more effective vehicle for dispensing conditionality than is the Bank. As one who has served in both organizations, I can confirm that they have a valid point. There is no question that the Fund's hierarchical organization is more effective in producing timely and coherent action than the loose organization and pluralism in ideas that characterize the Bank.However, two counter arguments deserve attention. One is that the way a bureaucracy develops is in part a consequence of what it is asked to do. Since the Bank has not in the past had any responsibility for organizing a PRGF-type program, it is not surprising that it does not have up and running the capacity to do so. The question is whether there are convincing reasons for supposing that the Bank would be incapable of developing such capacity should it be given the responsibility for the PRGF.The other counterargument is that the PRGF is not intended to replicate the pattern of past conditionality. On the contrary, lending under this program is to be guided by a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), which is to be prepared by the borrowing government in consultation with its civil society and private sector (as well as the Fund and Bank). The intention is to ensure that the program has local ownership, something that recent research has demonstrated conclusively to be of key importance if reforms are to deliver. The danger is that the PRSP will prove to be a mere figleaf, which the Fund dictates as it has so often dictated conditionality in the past (which is also supposed to be the borrowing government's own program). Some Fund staff members regard ownership and conditionality as antithetical-conditionality ought to require, in their view, a country to do things that it does not want to do. The logic is that conditionality is used as a device to ration access to cheap IMF credit; make the conditions the perpetuation of sensible past policies, and the IMF would soon be flooded by requests to borrow. One may have serious doubts about the ability of an organization where such attitudes exist to make the intellectual leap to lending on the basis of programs that enjoy ownership. The Bank, in contrast, has worked quite hard in recent years to foster local ownership, and would therefore be much better placed to initiate a program in which ownership is key.Another change suggested by the ODC report concerns the collection and dissemination of statistics (p.12). It urges that both the IMF and World Bank should hive off their statistics operations and that these be placed in a separate and independent agency devoted exclusively to collecting and publishing economic data. I share the view that this would be a useful change, which would preclude the potential danger that a conflict of interest could corrode data, as well as centralizing statistical expertise.The surveillance section above also noted the substantial measure of consensus on the Fund's role in surveillance, particularly concerning the desirability of increasing transparency. In fact the Fund has already come a long way in this direction. I recall my pride in being so subversive as to publish the text of a Letter of Intent in Williamson (1983): today the IMF routinely publishes the text of Letters of Intent, and much more, on its Web site. I endorse the widespread consensus that the Fund could usefully focus attention on vulnerabilities stemming from weaknesses in the financial system, the level and maturity structure of foreign debt, and progress in implementing the sundry international standards currently being developed. I also endorse the CFR view that the Fund should actively encourage potentially vulnerable countries to impose appropriate capital inflow taxes.The requirement for regular and timely publication of statistics regarding the maturity structure of sovereign debt . . . is also sensible and unobjectionable. The obvious question it raises, however, is whether data on sovereign debt will suffice.There remains one major area where I (like the ODC report) am out of sympathy with the current conventional wisdom. This concerns the question as to whether all intermediate exchange rate regimes should be discouraged by IMF surveillance (for emerging markets and industrial countries, if not necessarily for low-income countries where capital mobility is still low) in favor of one or other of the two "corner solutions," either a currency board or a floating rate. I have discussed this extensively elsewhere (Williamson 2000), but let me just clarify that I would not deny that intermediate regimes are probably more crisis-prone than the corners. The point is that they also offer benefits that the corners do not, namely, the possibility of resisting the misalignments that are so often generated by both fixed and floating exchange rate regimes. If one judges that a seriously misaligned exchange rate jeopardizes the possibility of rapid and sustained growth, this is serious, and suggests one should resist the temptation to focus surveillance exclusively on crisis avoidance. Important as that is, one wants also to encourage countries to make the most of their growth potential.Nevertheless, the major differences about the future of the Fund are concerned with its role as a lender rather than with surveillance. Everyone agrees that the Fund should have a central role in any financing that may occur in the context of a macro crisis, but that is about the extent of agreement. The disputed issues are:the range of facilities under which the Fund should lend;the role, if any, of prequalification in the Fund's lending operations;the role, if any, of a payments standstill in accompanying Fund crisis lending;the terms on which the Fund lends.The Range of the Fund's Facilities. At present the Fund is able to lend under six different facilities: 1) traditional standbys, 2) the high-interest Supplementary Reserve Facility (SRF) introduced in 1998, 3) the Contingency Credit Line (CCL) announced in 1998 but so far unutilized, 4) the Extended Fund Facility (EFF) introduced in 1975 with the objective of allowing the Fund to make longer-term loans to developing countries experiencing a payments problem with a structural origin, 5) the PRGF through which the Fund makes low-interest loans to low-income members, and 6) the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility (CCFF) that dates from the 1960s and makes low-conditionality loans to countries experiencing an exogenous and temporary shortfall in export proceeds, or surge in the cost of cereal imports, or increase in interest costs. This already represents a significant rationalization against the situation prevailing before the spring 2000 meetings of the IMFC, which eliminated the Currency Stabilization Fund, the Buffer Stock Financing Facility, and support for commercial bank debt reduction (i.e., the Brady Plan). I have already argued that the PRGF should be transferred to the World Bank. One needs also to ask whether further streamlining would be appropriate.To start at the end, there is a strong logical case for retaining the CCFF. This is a mechanism whereby the international community helps primary-producing countries to cope with shocks that are truly exogenous with respect to their own behavior, without requiring them to devote their own real resources to building up reserves ahead of time. It economizes on the need to build up reserves.An equally persuasive case cannot be made for retaining the EFF. When this was introduced, in the 1970s, many middle-income countries were only just establishing access to the international capital market. The World Bank did not have a capacity to lend for adjustment, its lending was all project-directed. Hence such countries could not rely on being able to borrow in order to adjust to a payments shock with a structural origin, so it seemed reasonable for the Fund to provide a facility to respond to this need. But times have changed, in three ways. One is that most middle income countries can now borrow on the international capital market. Another is that the World Bank has since moved into structural adjustment lending, which is able to cope with very much the same type of situation. The third is that the low-income countries that are excluded from the international capital market are now accommodated by the Fund through the PRGF, which will still be available to them even if it is relocated to the World Bank. Bulgaria perhaps provides the strongest recent case for arguing that the EFF still has a role, but it is not obvious that Bulgaria could not have been accommodated through a World Bank structural adjustment loan instead.Three of the six sources . . . regard standstills as something to be deployed as a last resort rather than embodied as a regular element of crisis management.That then brings us to the CCL. This was introduced with the hope that countries that felt themselves liable to be exposed to contagion would be able to fortify their liquidity to a point that would deter any speculative attack. But, as noted, no country has so far applied for a CCL, and one needs to ask why. It is not difficult to find a plausible explanation. Application is in itself liable to be interpreted by the market as an admission that the country fears a speculative attack, an interpretation that is liable to provoke the very attack that it is hoped to deter. Even if that danger is circumvented, there is a similar danger that an attack could be induced if the Fund ever found it necessary to withdraw a country's eligibility to borrow. Then there is the fact that the Fund has judged it necessary to avoid a completely automatic right-to-draw even after a country has been declared eligible, and envisages an attenuated but nonetheless substantive process of review that could end with the imposition of additional conditionality. Thus it is not difficult to see why the CCL has so far failed to appeal to potential candidates. It is difficult to see this lack of interest ever changing by fiddling about with interest incentives. The conclusion I draw is that it would be sensible to abolish the CCL, while absorbing some of the features of its design into the other facilities designed to allow the Fund to respond to crises.Those other facilities are standbys and the SRF. Everyone, even the IFIAC majority, agrees that the Fund needs to be able to lend in a crisis situation. The questions are: under what conditions, on what terms, and in what quantities. While it seems quite sensible to envisage larger lending (relative to quota) carrying a higher interest rate, it is difficult to see what advantage is gained by having a separate window for the higher-interest lending. Accordingly, I recommend consolidating both facilities into a single window, which one might call the Crisis Facility, since its purpose is precisely to allow the Fund to help countries deal with crisis situations.8Thus the Fund would be streamlined down to two facilities. The CCFF would provide low-conditionality loans in response to shocks that were clearly outside a country's own control, such as shortfalls in the value of primary commodity exports. It would seem logical to include also other exogenous shocks, including natural disasters (such as Bangladesh's floods of 1998). The Crisis Facility would make loans in situations of macroeconomic crisis.Prequalification. While I have argued above that the CCL is unattractive to potential borrowers for very basic reasons, it would be a mistake to dismiss the line of analysis that motivated its creation. I would question the wisdom of the IFIAC majority recommendation that (after a transitional period) the Fund should lend only to countries that had prequalified. Nevertheless, the idea that countries should be able to borrow more, and/or more easily, and/or more cheaply is one with considerable merit if they have pre-satisfied certain conditions.A surefire way of lengthening crises would be to make the Fund's credits sufficiently short-term to keep private lenders guessing as to whether the country would be capable of honoring its debt-service obligations when the Fund has to be repaid.The attractions are most obvious with respect to the Crisis Facility. One wants to encourage countries to take actions that will minimize their vulnerability to crisis, and it seems natural to reward those that do by giving them assured access (or at least semi-assured access) to a lender of last resort (or at least to a quasi-lender of last resort). The key question is then, what actions should be required to prequalify? The majority IFIAC report suggests four:freedom of entry and operation for foreign financial institutions;well-capitalized commercial banks, preferably with part of the capital in the form of uninsured subordinated debt;regular and timely publication of the maturity structure of outstanding sovereign and guaranteed debt and off-balance sheet liabilities;"a proper fiscal requirement."The first of these is problematic. Traditionally countries have been allowed to decide for themselves whether or not they wish to allow entry of foreign banks. There is a legitimate economic reason why countries may under some circumstances hesitate to allow foreign banks to enter, namely, that this can erode the franchise value of existing banks, and therefore precipitate "gambling for redemption." Nor does there appear to be any empirical evidence that foreign banks can be relied on to stand by a country in times of crisis by increasing their exposure: indeed, the foreign banks in Argentina froze their exposure during the tequila crisis in 1995. Thus this proposal would seem at best premature.In contrast, a requirement of a solvent, well-capitalized, and well-supervised banking system would appear entirely appropriate. The worst crises happen when a weak banking system deters a central bank from raising interest rates as needed, so that a currency crisis and a banking crisis occur simultaneously. And the suggestion that a part of bank capital should be required to take the form of uninsured subordinated debt held by third parties is also compelling: its attraction is that the holders of such debt have no possibility of upside gains from risky bank behavior, so that they can be relied on to monitor and penalize any gambling behavior by bank management. In asking how one might go about implementing this requirement, an attractive possibility would be to adopt the suggestion of the CFR report (and the IFIAC minority) that the test should be whether a country has adopted and implemented the Basel Core Principles. One might also ask whether it might not make sense to extend the principle to reward observance of some of the many other codes of standards currently being prepared, but, at least initially, it may be best not to overburden the system by making too many demands on surveillance.The requirement for regular and timely publication of statistics regarding the maturity structure of sovereign debt (and off-balance sheet sovereign liabilities) is also sensible and unobjectionable. The obvious question it raises, however, is whether data on sovereign debt will suffice. None of the East Asian countries had a serious problem with sovereign debt: the problems arose with private sector debt, incurred either by banks (e.g. South Korea) or the corporate sector (e.g. Indonesia). Accumulating accurate and timely data on private sector debt raises altogether more formidable difficulties than are posed by sovereign debt. It happens that the Fund has already established a standard on this topic, which embodies a judgment as to how much data it is reasonable to expect a country to collect. The criterion for a country to get preferential treatment should be that it subscribes to the Fund's Special Data Dissemination Standard.The IFIAC report does not attempt to spell out the nature of the "proper fiscal requirement" that it suggests including as a prequalification requirement, presumably because this was added at the last moment in response to the objections of the minority that its absence would expose the Fund to supporting countries with runaway budget deficits. It is nonetheless not difficult to imagine the form that such a requirement might take. Perhaps it would be like the Maastricht fiscal requirement for joining EMU: a budget deficit no greater than 3 percent of GDP and a ratio of public sector debt to GDP of under 60 percent (or trending down). Or perhaps it would be expressed in terms of the primary balance, to avoid the objection that a criterion expressed in terms of the total deficit could act as an inappropriate deterrent to tightening monetary policy (though this creates the problem that the necessary primary balance varies across countries depending on their level of public sector debt). Or perhaps it would be expressed in terms of the cyclically-adjusted balance, to avoid the objection that a criterion expressed in terms of the crude deficit could act as an inappropriate deterrent to an anticyclical fiscal policy. Or perhaps it should be expressed in terms of the operational deficit, to avoid making unreasonable demands on countries that have still not eliminated a high inertial inflation. Orperhaps it would be better not to try to lay down a universal requirement to be met by all countries, but instead to have the Fund make a regular judgment on a country's fiscal position.The reform program laid out [here] . . . would not only return the Fund to the areas of its core competence, but it would strip the Fund down to two lending facilities, one designed to allow countries to replenish their liquidity when faced by exogenous shocks, and the other to help countries respond to crisis situations.That then raises the question as to why the Fund's judgment should be restricted to the fiscal dimension. Why not have the Fund's Article IV consultation end with the award of a rating of the country's overall macroeconomic policy? One would surely want this rating to be more like those of the ratings agencies9 than the simple yes/no rating embodied in the CCL, so that countries can be downgraded when they deserve it without automatically provoking Armageddon in the markets. Having such a rating awarded regularly by an official institution would also resolve the problem of what to use to determine the risk ratings used in calculating bank capital adequacy requirements.One other idea merits inclusion, in addition to the conditions suggested by the IFIAC report. This is the suggestion in the Geneva report (p.71) that the IMF should provide an incentive by lending on more attractive terms to countries that include appropriate provisions in bond covenants to make their bonds renegotiable under crisis conditions. These provisions "would include majority representation, sharing, nonacceleration, minimum legal action threshold and collective representation clauses, where these last provisions allow an indenture trustee to represent and coordinate the bondholders."Hence my suggestions for a list of prequalification criteria that would entitle countries to draw from the Fund under the crisis facility on enhanced terms:adoption and implementation of the Basel Core Principles for the domestic banking system;subscription to the Special Data Dissemination Standard;a good rating for macroeconomic policy in the most recent Article IV consultation;inclusion of collective action and allied clauses in its foreign bonds, specially sovereign bonds.How about drawings from the other facility that I have argued the Fund should retain: the CCFF? Many of the countries that are most likely to suffer strong variations in commodity prices are unlikely to have banking systems that have advanced to the point of implementing all the Basel Core Principles. Similarly, they may not be able to afford a statistical service sufficiently sophisticated to be capable of subscribing to the SDDS. It would be unfair to penalize them for not meeting the full standards expected for crisis borrowers. They should nonetheless face the same requirement of good macroeconomic policy as any other borrower, and they might also be rewarded for any of the other conditions that they meet.Payments Standstills. Three of the six sources being analyzed in this paper-the Geneva report, the CFR report, and Secretary Summers's speech-saw a role for standstills in dealing with at least some capital account crises. (The subject is not taken up in the other three reports.) All of them regard standstills as something to be deployed as a last resort rather than embodied as a regular element of crisis management.This is a topic on which I believe the conventional wisdom to be deeply unrealistic. The world tried for many years after 1945 to deny that sovereign debts ever needed to be restructured, but the Brady Plan finally acknowledged that this is not tenable. Not all contingencies are foreseeable, and hence, no matter how conscientious the debtor, contingencies may arise in which it is something between unreasonably costly and totally impossible for the debtor to maintain debt service according to the original contractual terms. This is now widely acknowledged, but its corollary is not. That corollary is that any creditor that suspects restructuring to be a possibility has an incentive to liquidate its claim while that remains possible. Limited official loans will simply allow more creditors to get out rather than encourage them to stay in. The choice is between unlimited official loans (a real lender of last resort rather than a quasi lender of last resort) and restructuring the debt. In any single instance the provision of unlimited liquidity may well be the most attractive option, provided at least that the country really has got its fundamentals in order so that its problem is indeed one of illiquidity rather than insolvency. But, even if one is not sure that past IMF loans have been a major source of moral hazard in the way the IFIAC majority believe, it seems quite implausible that promulgation of such a policy would not create moral hazard in the future. If one worries about that, the logical conclusion is that the IMF should never undertake crisis lending except in the context of a standstill. An essential component of the policies needed to deal with a capital account crisis has to be reconstruction of debt on terms that the country can respect, and until that has been accomplished it is foolhardy to try to maintain debt service.No one doubts that growth, and the poverty reduction that flows from it, is critically dependent upon disciplined macro policies, and that these lie within the core competence of the Fund.This means that a country that decided it needed to borrow from the Fund would be expected to declare a standstill while it negotiated with the Fund. It would start negotiating with at least some of its private creditors at the same time, with an overwhelming presumption that problems of illiquidity should be handled by extending maturities rather than reducing the present value of debt service obligations. The IMF might provide bridging loans while the negotiations were in progress, provided it was convinced that the country was negotiating with its creditors in good faith. It would conclude the negotiations only when it was convinced that the restructured debt profile agreed between debtor and creditors was one that the country could be expected to service according to the new contractual terms. At that point the country would also lift its standstill and start servicing its debt on the revised terms. Note that these arrangements give an incentive to both parties to seek a prompt debt restructuring: the debtor will be denied bridge financing from the Fund if it does not negotiate in good faith, and the creditors will not see debt service resumed until the negotiations have been completed.I agree with the bulk of the literature in assuming that it would be the country, rather than the IMF, that would declare a standstill. It would presumably do this at the same time that it announced that it was approaching the Fund. I am not persuaded that the difficulties in declaring a standstill are as great as is frequently asserted. In particular, I see no need for a set of well-defined rules regarding coverage. The country would have a strong incentive to make coverage as broad as is necessary to reestablish its financial standing, since it would know that no IMF loan would be forthcoming unless enough of its debt was restructured to allow it to service its debt. If that could be achieved by restructuring only sovereign debt, and without an element of discrimination unacceptable to the Paris Club, then presumably the country will choose to limit the standstill to sovereign debt. But if it knows that the Paris Club will demand parallel treatment for London Club debt, it would be foolhardy not to extend the standstill immediately to bank debt as well, since every bank would have an overwhelming incentive to liquidate whatever loans it could before the standstill that, in that circumstance, it would have to expect went into effect. The same applies to bonds if the Paris Club will demand similar treatment of bonds. And if it is unlikely that the country could get back on its feet without restructuring corporate debt, or while capital flight is in progress, then it would also be well advised to impose exchange controls that would suspend the servicing of corporate debt and/or control capital flight. But there is no need for the IMF to lay down rules about the extent of the standstill that it would expect to accompany an approach for money. The country can be left to choose how extensive to make the standstill.Critics of the standstill idea usually worry about the impact that legalization of standstills might have on the flow of credit to borrowing countries. Would lenders not be so worried about the possibility of a standstill being imposed as to decline to lend significant sums? One could indeed imagine that reaction if a borrower had a unilateral right to impose a standstill without any international restraint. But the version that I sketch above requires the Fund to certify that the debtor is negotiating to restructure its debts in good faith as a condition for receiving interim finance, and that it gets a final agreement only after the debts have been successfully restructured. This should usually accelerate a country's return to health, including servicing debt on contractual terms. A creditor that knew that any currently-unforeseeable debt problems would be handled in this expeditious way should be a more, not less, attractive client. It is only when a country had built up its debts to a point where a crisis begins to be feared that its creditors would have a good reason for not lending, but it is in those circumstances that many of us feel it to be highly desirable for lenders to show more restraint. It is probably true that a standstill requirement would bring crises forward in time, and might even prevent the occasional case of a country with a potential crisis that manages to fight it off by prompt action, but even this would have a countervailing advantage in that it would be altogether more likely that countries would be brought to restructure their debts before a write-down was necessary. As creditors came to accept that the norm would be an extension of maturities rather than a loss of present value, so any deterrent effect (other than in circumstances when debt was already excessive) would vanish.Loan Terms. This concerns the questions of how large a loan countries should be entitled to, of the maturity of those loans, and of the interest rates they should be required to pay.Some of the assertions that IMF loans could be reduced in size seem to be based more on faith than analysis. I have already argued that one would in fact need indefinitely large loans in order to ensure being able to restore market confidence without an accompanying private sector debt restructuring. Adding the requirement of a standstill and a private debt restructuring is essential if one wishes to limit the size of IMF loans and still be confident that they could restore a country's financial standing.The IFIAC report suggests limiting IMF loans to 120 days, with the possibility of only one rollover. The reason it gives for this recommendation is that "[h]istorical experience suggests that liquidity crises typically last for a matter of weeks or, in extreme cases, for several months" (p.46). This is naïve: the reason liquidity crises are short-lived is that private lenders are soon able to see where the country is going to be able to get the resources to service its debts. A surefire way of lengthening crises would be to make the Fund's credits sufficiently short-term to keep private lenders guessing as to whether the country would be capable of honoring its debt-service obligations when the Fund has to be repaid. The maturity of the Fund's existing standby facility, namely 3-5 years, seems altogether more appropriate.The IFIAC report suggested that Fund lending should be done at a penalty interest rate (defined as "a premium over the sovereign yield paid by the member country one week prior to applying for an IMF loan," p.46). This runs counter to the tradition by which the Fund lent on the finest terms that any sovereign could command, a tradition inspired by the idea of an international self-help cooperative. The disadvantage of this tradition is that it can tempt a rational government into regarding the Fund as a preferred source of credit, deterring prompt repayment of loans and conceivably even tempting it into qualifying for new loans (although this would normally require staging a crisis, which governments do not usually find attractive). A solution suggested in the ODC report would be to increase the interest rate progressively as the duration of a Fund loan increases, thus providing an incentive for prompt repayment without threatening the effectiveness of a loan in the way that a short maturity would.The ODC report argues that a concessional interest rate would be needed for low-income countries if their theoretical right to draw were to be a reality. This also seems to me compelling, and not necessarily in conflict with the idea of a rate that becomes progressively more penal as time proceeds. The rate for these countries could start at a highly concessional level and then increase progressively over time.The final idea that ought to be integrated into the interest rate structure is that countries should be given an incentive to take steps that would minimize the chance of their needing to borrow from the Fund. That is, countries would face a lower interest rate the more fully they satisfied the conditions listed under the bullets above.The result of taking all three of these factors into account in determining the interest rate to be charged for a loan from the Fund would be to produce a complex interest rate schedule rather than the simple pattern of either rate A or rate B. This is no great disaster. Computers are very good at doing the arithmetic that would be necessary to keep track of payments due. It would also have the great advantage of increasing the penalties paid by countries for policy slippage in marginal installments, rather than confronting the Fund with the awful prospect of precipitating a certain crisis if it recognized worsening performance.
Concluding RemarksWe have heard many calls in recent months for the Fund to get back to basics or to focus on its areas of core competence, which everyone agrees lie in macro policy, crisis avoidance, and crisis management. The reform program laid out in the preceding section is intended to do that, and to do it without emasculating the Fund in the way that the IFIAC majority would. It would not only return the Fund to the areas of its core competence, but it would strip the Fund down to two lending facilities, one designed to allow countries to replenish their liquidity when faced by exogenous shocks, and the other to help countries respond to crisis situations. It recognizes that in a world of high capital mobility this is almost bound to involve debt restructuring, and therefore calls for countries applying for an IMF loan to impose a standstill on debt service payments, an approach that would deal once and for all with the danger of creditor moral hazard. It suggests the use of variable interest rates on loans to build an appropriate pattern of incentives for member countries to choose policies that would minimize the danger of their encountering a crisis, and that would enable and encourage them to repay the Fund promptly when they found it necessary to borrow. While it returns the Fund to its areas of core competence, these are ones that are of major importance to even the poorest members of the Fund, ensuring that the IMF would continue to play a vital role in the world economy.
Notes
1. Prompting Paul Krugman (2000) to quip "Oh, yes it can"!2. However, it did suggest lower interest rates on Fund lending to countries that include collective action clauses in their bond contracts, a related suggestion that is pursued later in this brief.3. At a meeting at the Brookings Institution on 11 April 2000, Alan Meltzer claimed that the majority report also contains just such a proposal for discriminating between lending at a penalty rate to countries that had prequalified ("List A") and lending at a super penalty rate to the rest ("List B"). I have failed to find any passage in the majority report that bears that interpretation, beyond the transitional period, but we may interpret his claim as indicating that at least the chairman of the Commission has been intellectually convinced of the desirability of this approach.4. Nevertheless, there may be some interest in a set of proposals in a recent article that focused exclusively on the question of Fund governance (Askari and Chebil 1999). They express concern about the distribution of quotas, and the ad hoc procedures for adjusting quotas, which have led to current anomalies like the large overrepresentation of Euroland and Saudi Arabia and the underrepresentation of South Korea, and arguably China, and a number of other Asian countries. They recommend reducing the supermajority needed to approve certain decisions so as to deprive the United States of its veto, citing the conditionality that Congress has unilaterally imposed on the Fund for its approval of quota increases as intolerable for a multilateral institution. (This included in 1989 a requirement that the Fund recruit development economists trained in analyzing the linkages between macroeconomic conditions and short- and long-term impacts on sustainable management of natural resources, and in 1998 a requirement that no IMF money be used to subsidize South Korean industries that compete with US industries, see Askari and Chebil 1999, p.351.) They advance a number of proposals for improving the operation of the Executive Board: seeking a greater diversity of backgrounds of EDs, and even appointing a couple of nonvoting EDs with no country affiliation from the private sector; making all the constituencies multi-country; and encouraging the Board to initiate proposals rather than simply rubber-stamp staff initiatives. They argue that the positions of the managing director and first deputy managing director should be opened up to the best person available, irrespective of nationality and professional background, and again betray a sympathy for candidates from the private financial sector. They urge that the staff should also have a more diverse professional background than economists with PhDs from American universities, and that there should be higher rewards for the good performers and a greater willingness to fire poor performers. They criticize the use of the IMF as a political slush fund (a theme that can also be found in several of the five reports that have been reviewed, although not in the speech of Secretary Summers). They argue for transparency and point to deficiencies in the Fund's historical record on corruption. They conclude that the time has come for a comprehensive review of the IMF's governance in parallel with its policies, and urge the Fund's management to reach out to international civil society in initiating such a review that might strengthen the Fund and enhance its performance.5. However, members of the IFIAC majority have in private conversation urged that one should not take the text of the report too literally, and stated they would not oppose transferring the PRGF to the Bank.6. Specifically, the IMF was allowed to sell a small part of its gold holdings in the 1970s, after the monetary use of gold was first suppressed, in order to create a trust fund to make low-interest loans to poor countries. In the late 1970s the Fund also made extensive standby loans to poor countries, which they were unable to service in the adverse conditions of the 1980s. Both were therefore refinanced by low-interest loans from a newly-created Structural Adjustment Facility in the 1980s, which was further expanded to the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility in the 1990s, which was then renamed the PRGF in 1999 to reflect the increased concern with poverty.7. Some people seem to argue that the IMF should help all its members, on equity grounds. But poor countries would still get benefits in terms of policy advice, hopefully crisis avoidance, and crisis resolution under the ODC proposals, as well as access under the CCFF. The Fund might usefully consider the case for improving access to the CCFF.8. This bears some similarity to the CFR proposal to consolidate the SRF and the CCL into a new contagion facility, although the lack of conditionality envisaged for the contagion facility strikes me as unrealistic and differs significantly from my subsequent proposals.9. Though preferably expressed in less opaque language than BBB versus BB-.
References
Askari, Hossein, and Samir Chebil (1999), "Reforming the IMF: Some organizational and operational issues," Banca Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review.Ahluwalia, Montek (1999), "The IMF and the World Bank in the New Financial Architecture," in International Monetary and Financial Issues for the 1990s, vol. XI (New York and Geneva: United Nations); referred to as "the Ahluwalia report."Council on Foreign Relations Independent Task Force (1999), Safeguarding Prosperity in a Global Financial System: The Future International Financial Architecture (Washington: Institute for International Economics); referred to as "the CFR report."De Gregorio, Jose, Barry Eichengreen, Takatoshi Ito, and Charles Wyplosz (undated but apparently 1999), An Independent and Accountable IMF (Geneva: International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, and London: Centre for Economic Policy Research); referred to as the "Geneva report."International Financial Institution Advisory Commission (2000), Report of the International Financial Institution Advisory Commission (Washington: no publisher specified); referred to as "the IFIAC report."Krugman, Paul (2000), "Errors of Commission," New York Times, 8 March.Overseas Development Council (2000), The Future Role of the IMF in Development (Washington: ODC); referred to as "the ODC report."Summers, Lawrence (1999), "The Right Kind of IMF for a Stable Global Financial System," speech at the London Business School, December 14.Williamson, John (1983), IMF Conditionality (Washington: Institute for International Economics).____ (forthcoming 2000), Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging Markets: Reviving the Intermediate Option (Washington: Institute for International Economics).
Seattle will be remembered as the city where street demonstrations stopped global trade talks cold. But the Seattle protesters don't deserve such notoriety. The meeting actually fell victim to serious substantive disagreements among the member countries of the World Trade Organization (WTO) over the prospective agenda for new trade talks. These policy differences probably could have been bridged, if the WTO's decision-making process had not broken down. Much of the damage to the WTO was self-inflicted.
Efforts to relaunch new trade negotiations will likely face similar difficulties until member countries agree to rationalize decision-making within the WTO.1 We analyze the WTO's main problems in this area and propose management reforms to ensure that all WTO members are fully represented at the bargaining table.
How the GATT used to work and why the WTO doesn't work like
that any more
Throughout the postwar era, governments worked together in eight rounds of multilateral trade negotiations in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to produce concrete benefits for all participants. GATT agreements substantially opened industrial country markets (although high barriers remain in agriculture and apparel) and contributed importantly to economic growth in developing countries, particularly in Asia and Latin America.
Countries came to the GATT to "do business" and largely left their political rhetoric to the talkathons of the United Nations and its agencies. The system worked by consensus: no votes on senseless resolutions; no decisions by majority rule.2 The consensus rule was not abused. Developed countries, particularly the United States and the European Community, drove the GATT agenda and negotiations but did not insist on full participation by all countries. In turn, developing countries did not block progress in trade talks-both because the accords posed few demands on them and because they made huge gains from the commitments of the developed countries extended to them on a most-favored nation basis. Moreover, as the weaker partners in the GATT, they benefited significantly from the well-functioning of the multilateral rules-based system.
The WTO still operates by consensus, but the process of "consensus-building" has broken down. This problem emerged long before the WTO ministerial in Seattle; indeed, it was evident at the birth of the WTO itself.3 It has two main causes:
First, WTO membership has greatly expanded, encompassing many developing countries that previously were outsiders or inactive players in trade negotiations. The GATT had 23 signatories when it came into effect in January 1948, and 84 signatories by the end of the Tokyo Round in 1979. More than 110 countries signed the Uruguay Round accords in Marrakesh in April 1994 (including several countries with observer status in the GATT). As of January 2000, the WTO has 135 members with an additional 31 in the process of accession. As a result of domestic economic reforms, including trade liberalization undertaken unilaterally and pursuant to GATT negotiations, developing countries now have a greater stake in the world trading system and a greater claim on participation in the WTO's decision-making process.
Second, WTO members can no longer "free ride" on negotiated agreements. Starting with the Uruguay Round accords, countries have had to participate in all of the negotiated agreements as part of a "single undertaking." This requirement means that developing countries have to commit to substantially greater reforms of their trade barriers and trade practices than they did in the past. Consequently, they need to be better informed about issues under negotiation. In the Uruguay Round, many countries had to accept obligations developed without their participation, and which required the implementation and enforcement of regulatory policies that they have had great difficulty in fulfilling.
In sum, GATT decision making worked in the past because there were fewer countries actively engaged and there was no compulsion for all countries to adhere to the results. Decisions could be taken by the "Committee of the Whole" because only a few countries were significantly affected by the results. Consensus-building engaged a small group of countries; the rest were relatively passive. This process has fallen victim to the GATT's success in integrating developing countries more fully into the trading system and requiring them to be full partners in new trade agreements.
More active participants, representing more diverse interests and objectives, have complicated WTO decision-making. China's prospective accession will amplify this problem by adding another politically powerful player that will demand a strong voice in the WTO. In addition, WTO decision-making has become more complicated as member countries face increasingly complex issues (for example, intellectual property rights) on the WTO negotiating agenda.
The traditional "Green Room" process, in which a relatively small number of self-selected developed and developing countries get together to decide on divisive issues, excluded too many newly active players in WTO negotiations and thus had problems building consensus. In the course of preparations for the Seattle Ministerial, developing countries tabled about half of the proposals made for the WTO agenda. The Geneva decision-making machinery could not accommodate the diversity of views.
While it is unfair to characterize the Green Room process as "medieval," it does need to be modernized. At present, participation in the Green Room varies by issue and has increased over time. For instance, in the Tokyo Round, these talks normally involved less than 8 delegations while today it is not uncommon to have up to 25-30 participants in a "full" Green Room. There is no objective basis for participation in these meetings but generally only the most active countries in the negotiations participate. As it has evolved over time, Green Room consultations typically include the Quad (i.e. United States, European Union, Canada, and Japan), Australia, New Zealand, Switzerland, Norway, possibly one or two transition economy countries, and a number of developing countries. Developing countries that often participate in the Green Room include Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Egypt, Hong Kong, China, India, Korea, Mexico, Pakistan, South Africa and at least one ASEAN country; most smaller developing countries stay out for lack of adequate resources or capabilities.4 For instance, 18 of the WTO members from Africa have no representation in Geneva.
Decisions taken in the Green Room are conveyed to the larger membership for final decision. Prior to Seattle, the larger membership rarely differed with proposals developed by the small group. But the system broke down in preparations for and deliberations in Seattle.5
In sum, the current system provides input into the decision-making process by a number of large developing countries but excludes representation of the interests of the majority of WTO members. Ironically, these largely developing countries are the ones being asked to undertake more substantial liberalization of their trade barriers and reform of their trade practices than their industrialized partners; they deserve more of a voice in the WTO's decision-making process.
How to make WTO decision making more inclusive and more efficient
The WTO has outgrown its increasingly unrepresentative system of decision-making. A new, permanent management or steering group needs to be established to make WTO procedures more equitable and efficient.
At first blush, reforming the Green Room process seems easy; in fact, the task has long been opposed by the very countries it would have benefited. Previous attempts to establish a smaller steering group or executive board (akin to those in the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund) to represent the broader membership in the negotiation of trade accords have failed due to strong resistance from the majority of developing countries. These WTO members, especially the small and least-developed countries, have objected to smaller groups in which they have no input. Accordingly, they did not want to institutionalize a system of proportional representation and thus formally undercut the myth of majority rule in the GATT/WTO if issues were taken to a vote on a one-country, one-vote basis. Ironically, they opted by default for decision-making dominated by the Quad countries.
As the preparations for and talks in Seattle demonstrated, the current ad hoc arrangement for Green Room debates has become unwieldy. The number of participants continues to grow; the process threatens to become so inefficient that it may eventually break down.
What needs to be done? Simply put, the WTO needs to establish a small, informal steering committee (20 or so in number) that can be delegated responsibility for developing consensus on trade issues among the member countries. Such a group would not undercut existing WTO rights and obligations nor the rule of decision making by consensus; we are not advocating proportional or weighted voting. Each member would maintain the ultimate decision to accept or reject such pacts.
Participation should be representative of the broader membership, and be based on clear, simple, and objective criteria:
Absolute value of foreign trade (exports and imports of goods and services), ranked by country or common customs region.
Global geographic representation, with at least two participants from all major regions.
Table 1 shows the top 25 countries based on the value of their trade in 1996, a pre-Asian crisis year.6 The EU is taken together, in terms of its extra-EU trade, as it speaks with one voice in the WTO, having its own internal rules and procedures for arriving at intra-EU consensus. Under the world trade share criterion, a large number of the current Green Room participants would continue, including important Asian and Latin American developing countries. However, some of the regions, notably Sub-Saharan Africa, the Andean Community, the Caribbean and Central America would not be represented. That is why the second criterion is needed to ensure global geographic representation.
As proposed above, the Green Room would have 20 seats, with a certain number reserved for representatives from previously under-represented regions in Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa, and Asia. Of course, there will be competition for the slots. Some countries will qualify simply because of their dominant trade share; most others, however, will have to coordinate with other trading partners to ensure that their cumulative trade passes the bar.
Groups of countries, based on existing regional arrangements or formed on an ad hoc basis, would be encouraged to pool resources and share representation (just as the Nordic countries did for many years during GATT negotiations). In fact, several groups of developing countries have already done so in preparing for the new round (for example, the Mercosur and the Caribbean Regional Negotiating Machinery). The formation of groups would be voluntary; each group would then select its representative for a particular meeting from among its membership, based on the interests of its members and the expertise of their WTO delegates.
Such arrangements would not impede, and may encourage, issue-based alliances among different groups in the Green Room. For example, the Cairns Group on agriculture might find support among a sizeable share of Green Room delegates.
To be sure, many countries, especially those who normally attend the Green Room talks, oppose reforms fearing that their influence would be diluted if participation was limited or contingent on group representation. But these countries would be even worse off if the Green Room process was marginalized-which is the most likely alternative to Green Room reform.
The idea of a group of countries represented by only one of them in an international organization is not new. Presently, both the World Bank and the IMF have country groupings represented by a single director on their boards. The current country groupings in the Executive board of the IMF are given in Table 2. The list in Table 2 is only illustrative of the point that country groupings are possible and does not in any way suggest similar groupings in the WTO. Indeed, since the EU speaks with one voice in the WTO and many countries in Table 2 are not members of the WTO, the IMF groupings are not relevant for the WTO.
The formation of groups of countries would serve two important functions. First, it would significantly increase the number of WTO members represented in the Green Room process. Second, it would provide a forum for information sharing and consultation among group members, and a channel for the provision of technical assistance on WTO matters. Small countries in particular would benefit from such pooling of resources.
An illustration of how the Green Room could be reconstituted is given in Table 3. The new, previously unrepresented regions/countries could be:
the Central American and Caribbean countries, with extra-region trade of $38 billion;
the Francophone African group, the last group listed in Table 2, with a trade volume of over $40 billion;
the other African group that includes Angola in Table 2, with a volume of trade of over $60 billion, even excluding South Africa7;
Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru through the Andean Community, with an extra-region trade of about $75 billion (in place of Venezuela alone);
the current WTO members of North Africa and the Middle East, which when linked with Egypt, have a trade volume of $138 billion;
Uruguay and Paraguay which would share representation with Argentina and Brazil through MERCOSUR, with an extra-region trade of about $129 billion;
CEFTA, with an extra-region trade of about $190 billion; and
Brunei Darussalam and Vietnam through ASEAN, which has an extra-region trade of about $570 billion.
Clearly, Table 3 illustrates only one way in which country groupings could afford broader representation in the WTO decision-making process. Some countries may fault our proposal because many WTO members can only be represented if they volunteer to participate as part of a group. For instance, Sub-Saharan African members or even North African and the Middle Eastern members will only be represented if they form groups. Smaller developed and developing countries may lose their current individual participation but normally would be represented if they aligned themselves to their regional partners. But, in return, they would benefit from the more efficient and equitable operation of the Green Room process, involving a workable number of participants representing all major geographical regions.
The proposal made in this Policy Brief presents one approach for resolving problems with the WTO decision-making processes, so clearly evidenced in Seattle. There can surely be other ways of representing WTO members in the Green Room process, including by allocating a fixed number of seats on a regional basis. However, we believe that the more objective the basis for selection, the more acceptable it would be to the entire membership of the WTO. The merit of our proposal lies in the twin criteria chosen, viz. the value of trade and global geographic representation. This is both objective and relevant to decision making in the WTO and causes the least disruption to existing Green Room players, while bringing in others previously excluded.
Notes
1. By decision-making we mean the process by which member governments resolve issues concerning the conduct of trade negotiations and the management of the trading system. We do not include rulings by dispute panels, which are not inter-governmental decisions, although changes to the WTO's Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU) under which those panels operate would be relevant. The broader issue of transparency of WTO decision-making to the general public is beyond the scope of this brief.
2. Consensus is achieved if no member present disagrees with a decision. Votes can be held if a decision cannot be arrived at by consensus, but rarely occur.
3. See Jeffrey J. Schott, The Uruguay Round: An Assessment. 1994. Washington: Institute for International Economics, pp. 138-140.
4. Thus, even today about half to two-thirds of any "full" Green Room process would be comprised of developing country participants.
5. Adding insult to injury, many developing countries actively engaged for the first time in WTO preparations for a new round, and were angered at their exclusion from the decision-making process in Seattle.
6. This exercise can also be done using 3 or 5 year averages.
7. This grouping could also be that of the Southern African Development Cooperation (SADC) region. In this case it would include South Africa but would exclude Burundi, Gambia, Kenya, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Uganda.
Table 1: Value of trade, 1996 (in billions of dollars)


  1. European Union+ (extra-EU)
2065*
  2. United States+
1805
  3. Japan+
914
  4. Canada+
446
  5. Hong Kong, China+
369
  6. Republic of Korea+
331
  7. Peoples' Republic of China^
326
  8. Singapore+
299
  9. Switzerland+
231
10. Mexico+
207
11. Malaysia+
170
12. Australia+
158
13. Thailand+
155
14. Brazil+
116
15. Norway+
113
16. Indonesia+
104
17. India+
97
18. Turkey
94
19. Poland+
78
20. Israel
67
21. South Africa+
66
22. Czech Republic+
63
23. Philippines+
60
24. Argentina+
55
25. Venezuela
40


Source: Compiled from Table 15: Balance of Payments Current Account and International Reserves, World Development Report 1998/99, The World Bank.
* Taken and adapted from the WTO Annual Report, 1997, Tables 1.6 and 1.7.
+ Presently likely participant in Green Room. Other likely current participants not shown include Chile ($39 bn.), New Zealand ($37 bn.), Hungary ($35 bn.), Egypt ($34 bn), Colombia ($32 bn.) and Pakistan ($25 bn.).
^ PRC is not yet a member of the WTO but is included as its accession is imminent.
Table 2: Country Groupings in the Executive Board of the IMF
(listed in order of importance by voting power)


1.
United States
2.
Germany
3.
 Japan (same total votes as Germany)
4.
France
  5.
United Kingdom
 6.
Belgium (Austria, Belarus*, Czech Republic, Hungary, Kazakhstan*, Luxembourg, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Turkey)
 7.
Netherlands (Armenia*, Bosnia and Herzegovina*, Bulgaria, Croatia*, Cyprus, Georgia*, Israel, Macedonia*, Moldova*, Romania, Ukraine*)
8.
Mexico (Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Spain, Venezuela)
9.
  Italy (Albania*, Greece, Malta, Portugal, San Marino*)
10.
Canada (Antigua and Barbuda*, The Bahamas*, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Ireland, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines)
11.
Denmark (Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania*, Norway, Sweden)
12.
Saudi Arabia*
13.
Angola (Botswana, Burundi, Eritrea*, Ethiopia*, Gambia, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia*, Malawi*, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe)
14.
Australia (Kiribati*, Korea, Marshall Islands*, Micronesia*, Mongolia, New Zealand, Palau*, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Samoa*, Seychelles*, Solomon Islands, Vanautu*)
15.
Egypt (Bahrain, Iraq*, Jordan*, Kuwait, Lebanon*, Libya*, Maldives, Oman*, Qatar, Syrian Arab Republic*, UAE, Yemen*)
16.
Thailand (Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia*, Fiji, Indonesia, Lao Peoples' Democratic Republic*, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal*, Singapore, Tonga*, Vietnam*)
17.
Russia*
18.
Switzerland (Azerbaijan*, Kyrgyz Republic, Poland, Tajikistan*, Turkmenistan*, Uzbekistan*)
19.
Brazil (Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guyana, Haiti, Panama, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago)
20.
India (Bangladesh, Bhutan*, Sri Lanka)
21.
Iran* (Algeria*, Ghana, Morocco, Pakistan, Tunisia)
22.
China*
23.
Chile (Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay)
24.
Gabon (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde*, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros*, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea*, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Niger, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe*, Senegal, Togo)


* Not members of the World Trade OrganizationSource: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/memdir/eds.htm
Table 3: Value of trade, 1996, with country groupings
(in billions of dollars)


  1. European Union (extra-EU)
2065*
  2. United States
1805
  3. Japan
914
  4. Peoples' Republic of China and Hong Kong, China
700
  5. ASEAN1 (extra-region)
570
  6. Canada
446
  7. EFTA2 (extra-region) and Turkey
334
  8. Republic of Korea
331
  9. Mexico
207
10. Australia and New Zealand
195
11. CEFTA3 (extra-region)
190
12. North Africa & the Middle East (Egypt, Bahrain, Kuwait,
      Morocco, Qatar, Tunisia, UAE)
148
13. South Asia (India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and Pakistan)
143
14. MERCOSUR4 (extra-region)
129
15. Andean Community5 (extra-region)
75
16. Israel
67
17. South Africa
66
18. Africa 1 (see Table 2, Angola et al.)
60
19. Africa 2 (see Table 2, Gabon et al.)
40
20. CACM6& CARICOM7
38


Source: Compiled from Table 15: Balance of Payments Current Account and International Reserves, World Development Report 1998/99, The World Bank; from Tables 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.9 of the WTO Annual Report, 1997; and from Annex A and B from the Inter-American Development Bank's Periodic Note, October 1999.1 ASEAN: Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, Philippines, Brunei Darussalam and Vietnam.2 EFTA: Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, Switzerland3 CEFTA: the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovenia and the Slovak Republic.4 MERCOSUR: Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay.5 Andean Community: Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela.6 CACM: Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua.7 CARICOM: Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago and the dependent territory of Montserrat.

C. Fred Bergsten is Director of the Institute for International Economics. A slightly edited version of this policy brief orginally appeared in the January/February 2000 issue of The New Democrat. The global trading system underwent two major developments as the 20th century drew to a close. The first was the agreement between the United States and China in mid-November that will enable the Chinese to join the World Trade Organization in the near future. The second was the WTO's failure during its ministerial meeting in Seattle in early December to launch a new round of negotiations to further reduce trade barriers and write new international economic rules.If the Seattle talks had succeeded, the next major trade item on Congress's agenda might have been a revival of the 1997 and 1998 debates over restoration of presidential authority to negotiate trade agreements that Congress would then address on a "fast track." But the collapse of those talks almost certainly means that Congress instead will first take up the matter of U.S. trade relations with China--a scenario once considered quite unlikely, especially after President Clinton made the huge error of initially rejecting Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji's trade proposals last April.The congressional trade agenda has thus been reversed. China will be the priority issue for the near future, presumably in 2000 if the Chinese complete the WTO entry process early this year as scheduled.
The Issue for DecisionIt is important to understand the precise issue that Congress will consider. Contrary to popular belief, Congress will not vote on whether China can join the WTO. The president makes that decision for the United States. President Clinton presumably will approve, having agreed on the terms of China's accession. All of the major presidential candidates have indicated that they would support China's entry into the WTO as well. The rest of the WTO appears ready to agree, so China's membership seems assured barring some cataclysmic political development (for instance, a war with Taiwan.)China has clearly stated that it would not reduce its barriers to U.S. imports unless it received unconditional permanent normal trade relations status from the United States.Congress will, however, vote on whether to extend permanent "normal trade relations" status to China, meaning the same tariffs faced by our other trading partners. President Clinton promised China's leaders that he would strive to win congressional support for such status for China. Indeed, permanent assured access to the U.S. market is the largest tangible benefit China would gain from joining the WTO. It is virtually inconceivable that China would have agreed to open its markets so dramatically without a firm expectation of receiving permanent normal trade relations status from the United States in exchange.Congress has been approving presidential extensions of equal treatment for China on an annual basis for 20 years (through yearly waivers of the requirements of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment to the Trade Act of 1974, which denies permanent normal trade relations status to any non-market economy that impedes the emigration of its citizens). Approval of permanent normal trade relations status is necessary to eliminate the uncertainties that now surround U.S.-China trade, however, because a failure to renew the waiver could at any time push U.S. tariffs on Chinese products back to the stratospheric levels of the 1930s.. . . our failure to act promptly would result in an immediate loss of high-paying export jobs for American workers . . .The United States is not legally bound to extend permanent normal trade relations status to China even after it joins the WTO. The global trade body cannot force the United States to change its laws on this or any other issue.However, the WTO rules bar member countries from discriminating against other members. If Congress fails to approve permanent normal trade relations status, the United States will have to "opt out" of its WTO obligations to China. China would then be relieved of any reciprocal obligation to extend its newly liberalized trade regime to the United States. In conformity with the WTO rules, China has clearly stated that it would not reduce its barriers to U.S. imports unless it received unconditional permanent normal trade relations status from the United States.Some opponents of permanent normal trade relations status for China argue that continued annual renewal would meet the WTO requirement, provided that such renewals were no longer linked to a specific condition such as freedom of emigration. But the requirement of annual approval would itself be a condition, and the United States could still raise trade barriers against China at almost any time. This would maintain the uncertainties inherent in the current annual-renewal practice and perhaps even increase them because nonrenewal would not then be linked to any specific criteria.A U.S. failure to grant permanent normal trade relations status would . . . plunge our overall relationship with China into its deepest crisis since normalization in the 1970s.
The Economic StakesAfter China joins the WTO, any U.S. trade discrimination against that country would thus trigger Chinese discrimination against the United States. Because no other WTO member intends to discriminate against China, the ironic result would be that the United States--and only the United States--would fail to benefit from the dramatically increased access to the Chinese market that American negotiators painstakingly achieved over the course of 13 years. Japan, Europe, and Asian developing countries would rapidly take Chinese market share away from the United States, in sectors ranging from autos to computer software, in the world's sixth largest and most rapidly growing major market. Australian, Canadian, and Latin American grain exporters would have a substantial advantage over American farmers. American firms that managed to hang on to their Chinese customers would have to service them from subsidiaries in third countries, just as American firms have been forced to do in the past by other U.S. export sanctions.Even a delay in congressional approval of permanent normal trade relations following China's accession to the WTO would likely trigger such results, at least temporarily. Although House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt (in his desire to become House speaker) and Vice President Al Gore (in his desire to become president) undoubtedly would prefer to avoid raising divisive trade issues within the Democratic Party during a crucial election year, the potential costs of not acting are extremely high. Both Democrats and Republicans should work to avoid delay at all cost.American rejection of permanent normal trade relations status for China . . . would clearly signal that antiglobalization forces will dominate American foreign economic policy for the foreseeable future.Compounding the irony, our failure to act promptly would result in an immediate loss of high-paying export jobs for American workers-whose union leaders vigorously oppose permanent normal trade relations status for China. Those unionists presumably fear that the deal will eliminate U.S. jobs by increasing imports. But objective research shows that the great bulk of our purchases from China displace purchases from other developing countries rather than domestic production here. In other words, they shift the geographic composition of our imports rather than increase their total. This will also be true for clothing imports when WTO entry enables China to benefit from the elimination of our current quotas; the losers will be exporters in countries such as Bangladesh, South Korea, and Thailand. In any event, China has agreed to our insistence on special safeguards that will allow us to block any rapid surge in imports of textiles or anything else.
The Global Political ImplicationsEven more important than these economic effects, failure by the United States to grant China permanent normal trade relations status would severely undermine China's reformers and thus the country's movement toward market principles, a new legal system, and greater personal freedoms and human rights. During a recent meeting in Beijing, President Jiang Zemin contrasted China's WTO entry directly to his country's "deep sleep during our feudal period while the West was developing rapidly after the Renaissance." China's leadership realizes that it must avoid its predecessors' mistake of opting out of the world, which condemned China to almost two centuries of poverty and international humiliation (and thus susceptibility to totalitarian politics). By denying China the most important immediate fruits of its trade liberalization commitments, the United States would jeopardize those leaders' ability to integrate China more deeply into the global economic community.It is virtually inconceivable that China would have agreed to open its markets so dramatically without a firm expectation of receiving permanent normal trade relations status from the United States in exchange.A U.S. failure to grant permanent normal trade relations status would in fact plunge our overall relationship with China into its deepest crisis since normalization in the 1970s. It would be read by the Chinese leadership and public alike as confirmation of their suspicion that the dominant power of the 20th century seeks to contain the rise of the most likely emerging power of the 21st century. They would surely see it as an effort "to keep China poor."American rejection of permanent normal trade relations status for China would also have immediate global consequences for the United States. Coming on the heels of the failure at Seattle, it would clearly signal that antiglobalization forces will dominate American foreign economic policy for the foreseeable future. This would in turn confirm not only America's abdication of global economic leadership, but even its inability to participate constructively in cooperative international ventures of paramount importance to the rest of the world.If Seattle's "victors" are permitted to carry the day on China, the global liberalization program of the past half century will be at serious risk. Under that U.S.-led strategy, the world has enjoyed peace and prosperity as never before. But we know from history that the trading system tends to slide backward into protectionism and conflict whenever the forward momentum toward liberalization falters. Congressional rejection of permanent normal trade relations status with China, coming on the heels of the disaster at Seattle and the repeated failures to provide new negotiating authority for the president, could easily push the system into reverse.President Clinton should promptly propose permanent normal trade relations status for China. Congress should pass the measure in time to take effect as soon as China completes its accession to the WTO. Our economy and national security will suffer enormously if they fail to do so.

Gary Clyde Hufbauer is Reginald Jones senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics. This policy brief draws on the conference on “The World Trading System: Seattle and Beyond,” organized by senior fellow Jeffrey J. Schott and chaired by Director C. Fred Bergsten, that the Institute hosted in Seattle on November 30 during the WTO ministerial conference.
© Institute for International Economics. All rights reserved.
Seattle leaves a huge question mark over the U.S. role in world trade policy. Faulty preparation and flawed tactics were abundant—both in the street and between the delegations. The Battle of Seattle may acquire the same instructive value for future diplomats as Pearl Harbor has for military officers.
But this Policy Brief is not about preparation and tactics. The Seattle outcome might have been far different—if the U.S. Trade Representative had not swept concessions off the table months before the ministerial conference. Or if the police had cordoned downtown Seattle on Monday. Or if President Clinton had left the phrase “trade sanctions” out of his Tuesday interview. Or if France had agreed on Friday to the eventual elimination of agricultural export subsidies. But this Policy Brief is not about “might have beens.”
Instead, this Policy Brief is an attempt to size up the direction of world trade policy after Seattle. In particular, it focuses on strategies that open market forces might adopt to regain the initiative.
World Trade Game Score (since WTO 1994): Backlash 7, Open Market 3
By my score, the global Backlash forces, in the United States and elsewhere, have enjoyed seven victories since the WTO agreement was reached in Marrakesh in 1994. They defeated renewal of U.S. “fast-track” negotiating authority twice (scored only once in my count). In addition, the Backlash forces have stalled the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas (FTAA) in the Western Hemisphere and have slowed European Union enlargement. Kindred forces in Japan defeated the Early Voluntary Sectoral Liberalization” proposals in the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (APEC) at the Kuala Lumpur meeting in November 1998. Together with the French (concerned about U.S. cultural imperialism), the nongovernmental organizations killed the Multilateral Agreement on Investment (MAI) in December 1998. Meanwhile, the U.S. Congress has stalled a twin vote on NAFTA parity for the Caribbean Basin countries (Caribbean Basin Initiative [CBI] Parity) and the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). From a media exposure standpoint, their crowning glory was Seattle.
. . . ten years from now, Seattle could
be seen as the turning point—the event
that marked the end of the policy-driven
open markets agenda for much of the world.
Against this count, the Open Market forces have achieved three important victories since the WTO was established in 1994. They signed off on the Information Technology Agreement at Singapore in December 1996. They crafted the Basic Telecommunications Agreement in February 1997. And they adopted the Financial Services Agreement in December 1997. These were all solid achievements—even if they were not media spectaculars.
A Rest Stop Or a Turning Point?
Ten years from now, Seattle could be seen as only one more pause in the long march toward open markets. The march that began in 1947 with the establishment of the GATT has been interrupted many times. Europe had a difficult time negotiating current account convertibility in the 1950s. Oil shocks in the 1970s threatened the world trading system. Agriculture was particularly tough in the Uruguay Round. Yet on each occasion, progress resumed.
On the other hand, ten years from now, Seattle could be seen as the turning point—the event that marked the end of the policy-driven open markets agenda for much of the world. If this is the outcome, many countries could build new barriers, especially in areas not already covered by international rules (such as financial services and e-commerce). Three points are worth making in handicapping “rest stop” versus “turning point.”
First, the Backlashers have not yet succeeded in rolling back liberalization. NAFTA stands and prospers. Mercosur has so far survived Brazil's currency devaluation. In the aftermath of the Asian crisis, none of the ASEAN members nor Korea has reversed its trade commitments. In the tax arena, more legislators are worried about “runaway headquarters” (Chrysler/Daimler Benz) than “runaway plants.” The Tobin tax and its kissing cousins remain academic toys.
But in the aftermath of Seattle, the Backlashers can claim three achievements. They enlisted sympathizers who want the WTO to encompass moral values, not just economic virtues. In the process, they turned trade and investment talks into a political “third rail” (to borrow Marc Noland's phrase). And they probably added years to the life expectancy of stratospheric agricultural barriers, sky-high textile and apparel tariffs, the U.S. antidumping laws, and other formidable barriers.
. . . in the aftermath of Seattle, the Backlashers
. . . probably added years to the life expectancy
of stratospheric agricultural barriers,
sky-high textile and apparel tariffs,
the US antidumping laws, and other
formidable barriers.
Make no mistake: rollback is their goal. Hard-core labor Backlashers (fortified by sympathy from Clinton) want wide latitude to impose trade sanctions against offensive production processes. They want to extend textile and clothing quotas well beyond the 2005 phase-out date. They want tougher antidumping laws, and easier access to normal safeguards. They welcome capital controls. In time, they will resurrect the Burke-Hartke concept (dating from the early 1970s) of imposing import quotas and heavier taxes on the foreign operations of multinational firms. The “new” Backlashers want to put new trade agreements in peril until social issues are addressed. Both Backlash camps would dearly love to rewrite or even dissolve NAFTA.
Unless the Open Market forces regroup and adopt a winning strategy, “turning point” seems more plausible than a “rest stop.”
Next Battle: China
China is the next battle and it could prove decisive. It is hard to know how China and the WTO intersected in the minds of top administration officials, but three scenarios are plausible.
• First scenario: Clinton may have cut an implicit behind-the-scenes deal with AFL-CIO leaders: I'll trash Seattle and you don't trash China. A deal along these lines would give something dear to business (better access to Chinese markets) and something dear to the AFL-CIO (no new trade talks without labor sanctions). From what we know about the sequence of events, this scenario seems far more plausible as an after-the-fact rationale for hopeless fumbling in Seattle than a Machiavellian before-the-fact game plan. It is not at all clear that the AFL-CIO leaders will sign on to their part of the “bargain,” namely, stopping short of a “take no prisoners” battle against China.
• Second scenario: In vintage Clinton style, the “technical” talks over the details of China's accession to the WTO could be strung out and the normal trade relations (NTR) vote pushed forward to 2001, when a new president is sitting in the White House. This would deny Clinton an important legacy, but it might reduce the “China factor” in the U.S. presidential election and avoid embarrassing demonstrations in Washington.
• Third scenario: Clinton has simply lost control of trade and investment policy. Evidence for this scenario is a string of events since 1996: The loss of fast track in 1997. The MAI burial in 1998. The China fiasco in April 1999. Haphazard preparations for Seattle. Finally, Clinton's “trade sanctions” interview, which eliminated all prospects of reaching an accord with developing countries on labor issues. Under this scenario (favored by Marc Noland), China will be Clinton's last trade debacle—a big effort, but not big enough to round up the votes for permanent NTR. In the end, Congress votes the usual one-year extension.
Can the Open Market Forces Regroup? Lots of Generals, Not Many Soldiers
Missing from the ranks in the battle for open markets are business firms and consumer groups. The most energetic soldiers are economists. As Stalin famously remarked, “How many divisions does the pope command?” That said, many strategic concepts have been offered for regrouping the Open Market forces and sparking public enthusiasm for globalization. Everyone wants business and government leaders to speak out more forcefully in favor of free trade and investment. Beyond that common theme, strategies differ. For brevity, I will summarize the ideas of leading strategists in caricature.
Jagdish Bhagwati and Daniel Tarullo: “Back to basics.” Focus the WTO on border barriers. Reconsider the TRIPs agreement (as T. N. Srinavasan has urged). Bhagwati goes further: forget about regional groups—they're a nuisance at best, and more likely harmful. In other words, get the WTO out of difficult national sovereignty questions, and don't burden commerce with a spaghetti of FTAA, APEC, Pacific-5, and other new regional arrangements.
Problems: Where do you put the “social issues”? Will U.S. and European business firms push for new trade agreements that can be easily nullified behind the border? As a practical matter, several regional groups now seem healthier than the WTO—debilitated as it is by the splits within the Quad and between the United States and developing countries. In the regional arena the European Union is rapidly moving ahead on new deals with Mexico, Mercosur, and the Lomé Convention countries.

Robert Samuelson: “Let the markets work.” With dramatic cuts in transportation and communications costs, the ascendancy of multinational corporations, the rise of e-commerce, plenty of globalization will occur even if trade ministers take a 10-year holiday. Moreover, thanks to the overwhelming success of the U.S. economy, sensible countries will enthusiastically sign on to the Washington consensus and Anglo-Saxon capitalism, without another USTR or IMF mission abroad.
Problems: Mercantilism has dominated commercial policy for 350 years (today it's called “reciprocity”). Who hears the death rattle of this enduring ideology? What about growing underbrush that threatens to choke e-commerce and other new realms? C. Fred Bergsten's “bicycle theory” worked well at explaining past swings between liberalization and protection. Has this piece of political economy now vanished?
Larry Summers: “Go with the Living Ism.” In 1991, before he became a senior U.S. official, Larry Summers famously proclaimed his love for all the “isms”—bilateralism, regionalism, multilateralism. Now that the WTO has run into difficulties, this strategy would call for deepening NAFTA (especially with Canada), the Pacific-5 (Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, the United States, and Chile), working on bilateral issues, and doing a few sectoral deals. Just be pragmatic.
Problems: The NGOs killed the MAI, and some see a threat in the CBI and Africa. Will they pass up the next bilateral or regional deal? Indeed, in the regional context, won't they insist on a heavier loading of social issues? The same virus that hit Seattle could easily spread.

China is the next battle and
it could prove decisive.
I. M. Destler and Peter Balint: “Bring in the social issues.” These are the natural next step in the long GATT/WTO journey from tariffs, to quotas, to services, to intellectual property rights, to phytosanitary standards. Go with the flow. Reasonable people can find reasonable solutions that both improve production conditions worldwide and respect national sovereignty.
Problems: India, Brazil, and China have an automatic response: “Not on your life.” Will the United States and Europe put their own miserable treatment of illegal immigrants on the table? What about state environmental standards and layoff laws? Finally, what concessions will the United States and Europe make to get social clauses? Will they accelerate the elimination of Multifiber Agreement (MFA) quotas, slash textile and apparel tariffs, and reform their antidumping laws? Will they liberalize stratospheric restrictions on sugar, dairy, peanut, tobacco, and other specialty agriculture imports?
Dani Rodrik and Robert Litan: “Buy off labor.” This strategy sees the United States (not Europe) as the main stumbling block to open markets, and identifies organized labor as the key opponent. Hence the prescription. Enlarge the U.S. social safety net across the board, as Rodrik advocates. Or, in Litan's formulation, provide for a realistic, but degressive (e.g., lasting 2 to 3 years), make-up payment for a portion of the wages lost (e.g., starting at 75 percent of the loss) by all dislocated workers who find new jobs. Ensure that dislocated workers have health care and moving allowances.
Problems: Who will spend the necessary money for a wide social safety net? Gore is already attacking Bradley for wanting to increase the health care budget. My estimate for degressive wage make-up costs across the board is about $15 billion annually. Wage insurance limited to trade-impacted workers would come cheap, about $500 million annually. But labor has disdained all forms of Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) for 15 years. Why would it love this wrinkle? Besides, there is no meaningful distinction between workers displaced by technology or restructuring and workers displaced by trade. If labor alone is bought off, will other social causes be satisfied?
President Clinton: “Y'all come.” The central problem is process, not substance. Invite responsible NGOs into the negotiations. Allow them to bring disputes in the WTO. Broadcast the proceedings live on television and the Internet. A more open party will be a better party.
Problem: No one believes this solution. Probably not even Clinton.

Sizing Up the Problems
If the next U.S. president wants to restart the trade engine, he will need to commit the same level of political resources as he might devote to major tax, budget, or labor legislation. Gone are the days when important policy-driven progress toward open markets can be achieved without bitter political battles. There is no low-cost-lunch strategy.
If the new “third rail” proves too hot for the next U.S. president and his G-7 counterparts, then the open markets agenda will depend on the two forces inherent in Robert Samuelson's analysis: the technology revolution in transportation and communications, and the winning appeal of Anglo-Saxon capitalism. In a pre-Seattle trip to Asian capitals, Fred Bergsten found considerable enthusiasm for new regional institutions ranging from trade to money. Asian leaders are tired of dancing to Washington's economic tune. They want to write their own songs. Seattle can only reinforce these sentiments. If Washington and Brussels falter, the future trade agenda could be led by an Asian renaissance.
If the “third rail” turns out to be a Washington problem—and not so serious in Brussels, Tokyo, and Ottawa—the other G-7 powers might well pursue their own regional initiatives. The European Union might negotiate free trade arrangements with Mercosur and the Lomé Convention nations, adding to its extensive free trade network with Eastern Europe, North Africa, and Mexico. Japan could surprise everyone by negotiating a free trade agreement with Korea. And Canada might join the Northeast Asian party. A burst of regional energy along any of these lines would disadvantage U.S. exporters.
The U.S. Trade Calendar in 2000
Multiple trade issues loom on the congressional calendar. In the wake of Seattle, these issues present inviting targets for Backlash demonstrations, attracting new financial support and more media attention. Accordingly, a few thoughtful Open Market protagonists think that the best strategy—in an election year—would “cool down” trade and put off issues until 2001. Here is how “third rail” countertactics might play.
• String out the technical talks on China's accession to the WTO, and simply go for a one-year renewal of NTR in July 2000. (Clinton's “second scenario” for dealing with China.)
• Don't even mention “fast track.” At most, hold quiet consultations with Ways and Means and Senate Finance Committee leaders on possible new formulations and new labels.
• Hold off on CBI Parity and AGOA.
• Keep FTAA, APEC, and Pacific-5 talks at a strictly technical level.
• Avoid a media event of the House and Senate votes on continued U.S. membership in the WTO. (Under the 1994 legislation that ratified the Uruguay Round agreements, upon the request of a single member, the House and the Senate each vote up or down on continued U.S. membership in the WTO every five years.)
If the next U.S. president wants to restart
the trade engine, he will need to
commit the same level of political
resources as he might devote to major
tax, budget, or labor legislation.
• Downplay a possible adverse decision by the WTO appeals panel in the Foreign Sales Corporation case. (In a case brought by the European Union, a WTO panel found that this U.S. tax provision, designed to promote exports, violates the Uruguay Round Code on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures. The WTO appeals panel will issue its decision by March 2000.)
“Firewall” in 2000?
A different strategy for Open Market forces next year is to stand and fight. In this strategy, an all-out battle would be waged to welcome China in the WTO with permanent NTR legislation. Likewise, CBI Parity and AGOA would be the next priority.
The argument for this strategy is simple. Unless the Open Market forces build a firewall, the Backlash forces will gain momentum and financial support. If trade policy is stalled in 2000, it will be that much harder to restart the engine in 2001.
A New Strategy for 2001
Fact One. Steven Kull's polls show broad-based moral concern in the United States about labor and environmental conditions abroad (even if better conditions abroad translate into higher consumer costs at home). His polls also show that the American public is worried about U.S. job dislocation, even when workers can find new jobs at the same or better pay, and even when a flexible economy means lower prices at the local shopping mall.
Fact Two. Americans sharply disagree on the benefits of free trade, polarizing by income level. According to a Wall Street Journal poll, only about 32 percent of all U.S. adults think that the United States has been hurt by free trade agreements. (By contrast, 35 percent think the United States has been helped, and 24 percent think that trade agreements haven't made much difference.) However, 54 percent of adults with income under $20,000 think that the United States has been hurt by free trade agreements, while naysayers drop to 25 percent among households with income over $50,000.
Fact Three. Meanwhile, developing countries violently oppose a working group on labor in the WTO, and they were enraged by Clinton's mention of trade sanctions. Developing countries hold a well-grounded fear that the concerns and worries of ordinary Americans will be hijacked by the AFL-CIO and extreme Backlash groups—and turned into formidable trade barriers. Putting these three facts together, the time has come to address labor and environmental concerns, but with a strategy that
would not entail new WTO rules;
would be accepted by the U.S. business community;
and would broaden the base of U.S. public support for freer trade.

If this strategy can be crafted, then the way would be clearer for Congress to grant the next president authority to conduct trade and investment negotiations. No plausible strategy can avoid a political battle. The right strategy could improve the chances of an Open Market victory.
Six Linked Concepts of the New Strategy
• First, create a permanent independent U.S. commission, insulated from daily political life, to create and authorize labels certifying that imported and domestic products and services are made in ways that meet core labor and environmental standards. The labels would be optional, not mandatory, both for importers and domestic producers. For producers, the labels should become a “badge of honor,” enabling concerned consumers (business or household) to purchase certified products, at a premium price if necessary. The Global Reporting Initiative (www.globalreporting.org) has already published its suggestions for an appropriate framework.
• Second, dedicate a portion of capital gains taxes to creating a fund for degressive wage insurance (and health care and moving allowances) for all dislocated workers, as Robert Litan has urged. Individual capital gains taxes are running above $50 billion annually; hence earmarking 30 percent for degressive wage insurance and associated benefits should prove adequate. The basic rationale is that globalization and technology are shifting part of national income to capital; some of these gains are in turn captured by the capital gains tax. It is only fair that a slice of the rewards generated by the new economy be returned to those shaken up by its dislocations. Earmarking would foster harmony between winners and losers. For earmarking to have meaning, however, less money would be dedicated to the fund in years when capital gains plunge and tax receipts drop.
• Third, replace the antiquated and inefficient U.S. system for taxing the worldwide income of U.S. multinationals (a system that raises very little revenue) with a new system that allows a broad exemption for income earned abroad. However, the broad exemption would be conditioned on certification that the U.S. parent corporation, all its foreign subsidiaries, and its principal suppliers exceed core labor and environmental standards in their operations and appropriately disclose their labor and environmental performance. Again, an independent commission (not the IRS), drawing on the work of the Global Reporting Initiative, would set certification and disclosure standards.
• Fourth, in parallel with domestic initiatives on labor and the environment, the administration should launch negotiations in the International Labor Organization (ILO) to establish a worldwide system for certifying observance of core labor standards, by both firms and countries. Likewise, as Daniel Esty has proposed, the administration should enlist international support for creating a Global Environmental Organization (GEO). Among its tasks, the GEO would certify the observance of recognized environmental standards. Both the ILO and the GEO would issue periodic “report cards” on national performance, just as the IMF and the WTO do on trade and macroeconomic policy.
• Fifth, authorize the president to negotiate new trade and investment agreements to reduce barriers. Congress would vote these up or down on a “no amendments” basis, within the life of the Congress (if submitted during its first session). In other words, new authorizing legislation should call for enabling legislation on a “slow track,” not a “fast track.”
• Sixth, the authorizing legislation should give the president authority to pursue trade and investment negotiations in various forums—WTO, APEC, FTAA, Pacific-5—after giving advance notice, plus a list of specific objectives, to Congress. (After receiving notice, each house of Congress should have a 60-day window to disapprove the launch of negotiations—a variant of the “narrow track” idea floated by Representative Phil English.) The president should be permitted, but not required, to seek agreement on plurilateral or multilateral measures (in the ILO and the GEO as well as in trade organizations) that would reinforce the labor and environmental provisions already adopted by the United States (as outlined above). Broad presidential authority would enhance America's ability to achieve its goals—since the president would be tied neither to a single forum nor to unattainable objectives.

Adam S. Posen is senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics, and the author of Restoring Japan's Economic Growth (September 1998; Japanese translation, Toyo Keizai publishers, May 1999), as well as numerous other works on macroeconomic policy and on central bank independence.
In the months after it took office, the Obuchi government adopted many of the measures necessary to reverse the mistakes of the previous administration. These included large scale fiscal stimulus, a great share of which is in housing tax cuts, and funding of much of the additional public debt by short-term bonds. The activities of the Financial Supervision Agency to inject capital into weak banks on a strictly conditional basis, to close down or nationalize bankrupt banks, and to improve accounting have been real progress as well. Hence, the highly positive growth rate of Japan in the first half of 1999, the faster rise in the Nikkei than in the S&P 500 this year to date, and the disappearance of the “Japan premium” for international Japanese banks, all should not have come as a surprise to financial observers.
These positive results came readily because nothing fundamental has changed about Japan's ability to grow at close to 2 percent a year; the Japanese recession of the 1990s persisted and grew worse solely because of mistaken macroeconomic policies.1 Restoring positive growth was as simple as correcting fiscal and financial policy mistakes. Desire for the great should not make us fail to recognize the good—even if the current Japanese recovery falls short of the full rate of growth which could be attained through long-term structural reform, the current near 2% rate of growth is both a major improvement and sustainable.
Restoring positive growth was
as simple as correcting fiscal
and financial policy mistakes.
This policy brief explains in detail the economic reasoning why these policy shifts have had a significant positive impact, and why the importance of some negative factors for the prospects of Japanese recovery should not be overestimated. The policy agenda to assure a sustained recovery in Japan, however, is not yet completed. A responsible supplementary budget in Japan, consisting of housing and income tax cuts, is needed to finish the task in fiscal policy. More urgently, the mounting risks to the Japanese recovery from the remaining area of misguided policy—the course of monetary policy action resulting in deflation, as signified by the yen's recent appreciation—must be addressed.
The Sun Also Rises
Obviously, the Japanese economy cannot continue to grow at the torrid pace of nearly 8% annualized GDP growth at which it did in the first quarter of 1999. Still, the 0.9% annualized rate which followed in the second quarter confirms that enough has gone right in the Japanese economy to overcome any “givebacks” and cuts in public spending which were expected to drag down performance. There are many positive factors which must be given their due, and some negative factors which must be put in perspective.
The first positive factor is that when large fiscal stimulus was finally tried this year, it worked. In particular, the tax cuts for new primary housing and the income tax cuts have had a large effect, with spillover benefits for durable goods orders. This proves that people are not so anxious about the future of Japan as some budget hawks in the LDP and the Ministry of Finance have claimed—if they were, the tax cuts and the initial payments for public works would have been saved rather than spent. Instead, there has been a multiplier of greater than one on the fiscal stimulus so far this year, with most of the growth coming in domestic consumption, meaning that fiscal expansion has fed self-sustaining growth.
Second, the benefits of financial reform are just beginning to be felt. The conditional capital injection into the biggest banks was not completed until the end of March. Since then, people have switched more of their savings out of cash back into the banking system and the Japan premium has disappeared for those large banks remaining in international interbank transactions. Both of these developments indicate market faith in the clean-up, as far as it has gone. As would be expected with changed incentives, the re-capitalized banks have stopped making or rolling over bad loans. This combination of more available loanable funds and capital reduces the uncertainty for banks, stimulating productive lending and reducing risk-spreads on interest rates.
The policy agenda to assure a
sustained recovery in Japan, however,
is not yet completed.
Third, there are lasting structural improvements being made by these policies. The housing and income tax system still needs vast improvement—and some suggestions for using the upcoming supplemental budget to make further reductions are given in the next section—but the benefits of giving average Japanese more control over their own economic decisions have been made clear. On the financial side, the improved supervision of the banking system, the permanent move to transparent consolidated accounting, the efficiency gains from closing and merging banks, and the import of financial skills through foreign investment, all will enhance the functioning of the Japanese economy for years to come.
While these benefits have been underestimated, misplaced fears have been taken too seriously. The historically high (and rising) rate of Japanese unemployment is often cited as a drag on the economy, both directly and for the precautionary saving it is said to bring. Yet, as companies lay workers off, they gain in overall efficiency and they reduce uncertainty for the remaining workers about the future of the company. Unemployed workers continue to spend on basic consumption, even with Japan's too-small safety net, in part through family transfers. For all of Japanese society's distress about unemployment, its effects on growth should not be exaggerated. Remember that continental Europe has managed to combine rising unemployment and positive growth for years—not a desirable model, but one that shows growth can co-exist with labor market adjustment.
The real significance of the yen's
appreciation against the dolar is as
an indicator of continued domestic
monetary tightening in Japan.
There is also too much concern about the recent rises in 10-year Japanese Government Bond interest rates and in the yen-dollar exchange rate. Investment decisions by companies depend on many factors, not just interest rates and exchange rates. These include the economy's current and expected growth rate, the company's own balance sheet, the health of the company's banks, and the price of assets. All of these are improving at the moment, and their positive effects on investment should more than offset any foreseeable interest rate rise.
A similar statement can be made about the Yen, that many other factors feed into companies' profits besides the exchange rate, except it is a stronger statement because less than 12% of the Japanese economy is exported. There certainly is a level of yen per dollar beyond which the effect on exports can overwhelm domestic growth, but any rate currently expected has not surpassed that level.2 The real significance of the yen's appreciation against the dollar is as an indicator of continued domestic monetary tightening in Japan.
Japan Still Needs a Supplemental Budget Now
Japan does need additional fiscal stimulus through a supplemental budget now. The Diet should pass an additional round of large housing and income tax cuts in September's session. Fiscal reform can wait until Japan has had a couple years of positive growth. A supplemental budget is necessary to avoid repeating the disastrous mistake of April 1997: cutting the structural deficit by raising the consumption tax and reducing public spending before the recovery gained speed. Without additional stimulus measures, public spending is set to fall precipitously (by 4% of GDP) by end of 1999.
One can take the analysis further—keeping the momentum of government spending going until mid-2000 will have ever larger benefits as the quarters of positive growth accumulate in people's confidence and planning. A stimulus program with a true spending content (mamizu) of 3% of GDP, and not just false claims of spending, led to sustainable growth.3 The insistence of some LDP members outside of the government on immediate fiscal reform has been proven unjustified, and would be destructive if implemented.
Of course, the structural budget deficit will have to come down eventually, and the Japanese government cannot keep spending huge amounts indefinitely. The goal should be to spend the minimum amount in the rest of 1999 that will still be felt and noticed by most Japanese, and to bring down government spending slowly over the next several years.
What Japan really needs is tax relief
for those average Salarymen who currently
pay too much of the tax burden.
Therefore, a supplemental budget in the realm of 5-8 trillion yen (1.0-1.5% of GDP) mamizu is called for, which should be big enough to have clear effects. This also will make sure fiscal stimulus declines only a few trillion next year so that the negative effect will not offset growth, and people will have time to adjust. By mid-2000, with four or five quarters of positive growth in hand, the economy should be strong enough to withstand a little cutback in government stimulus, if it is not too abrupt.
The entire 5-8 trillion yen stimulus in the supplemental budget should take the form of additional housing and income tax cuts. In general, tax cuts reach every Japanese person with no delays in implementation. They are structural reforms for the economy at the same time as they stimulate. They have much larger multiplier effects on the economy than old-fashioned public works when they are credible. This can be seen by the very large response in the first quarter of this year to tax cuts for new primary housing. To make the new tax cuts credible to the public, they should be permanent revisions in the tax code.
Both housing and income taxes are extremely unfair in Japan, as well as inefficient. Many of those excluded from paying income tax are simply people who call themselves “farmers” or “small business owners”, not people truly in need. The last income tax cut was in the right direction, but helped the higher salary people most. What Japan really needs is tax relief for those average Salarymen who currently pay too much of the tax burden. There should be a cut of 25% in all income tax withheld from people's paychecks. This reduction would total around 5 trillion yen per year, and require no time or cost to implement.
Similarly, high housing tax rates, combined with land use restrictions, unfairly put good housing out of reach for many average Japanese. The small home mortgage tax credit of five years ago, and last December's write-off for construction of new primary residences, are steps in the right direction. The Diet should go three steps further: they should give three years to buy a new residence, not one, for people who claim a tax credit from selling their houses at a loss; they should increase the mortgage tax deduction for primary residences; and they should extend the tax credit for people buying new residences to people improving their homes.
The entire 5-8 trillion yen stimulus
in the supplemental budget should
take the form of additional housing
and income tax cuts.
These housing tax measures will add liquidity to the Japanese real estate market, because people with accumulated losses will be willing to sell their homes, and individuals scared by the experience of what happens when mortgages rise in real terms will be more willing to buy. An increase in housing liquidity will have very beneficial effects on asset prices and on the banking system.
Fiscal reform can be achieved later by cutting public spending while leaving taxes low. That combination of tax cuts first followed by spending cuts is what Reagan followed by Clinton did for the U.S. to great benefit. This sequence forces the public sector to shrink over time, and it is better to cut spending than to raise taxes. This sequence is also the only lasting way to reduce government expenditures. Historical evidence shows that only those governments which cut spending keep deficits down.4 Those governments which simply raise taxes always either lower them later or increase spending to match the higher revenues.
The Japanese political system with its over-representation of rural districts favors wasteful public works and construction. If the current government wishes to earn the vote of the cities of Tokyo, Osaka, and so on, and thus be popular with the majority of the Japanese people, the government will concentrate the supplemental budget on tax cuts instead. This is probably a good political investment in the long run, even if it means a little more difficulty in the budget negotiations. For the Obuchi government to pursue (mostly) tax cuts rather than wasteful public works would be a clear message of leadership to the Japanese people and to the world at large.
People ultimately judge central banks
on policy outcomes. Deflation is not an
outcome which will build faith
in any central bank.
Fears of a rise in interest rates are no excuse not to cut taxes in this permanent, structurally-sound, manner. Interest rates on long JGBs have already risen in anticipation of the supplementary budget because the government has been preparing markets for months, and a package of more than 10 trillion yen is expected. Thus, rates should not rise much higher and may even fall when the budget actually comes. More importantly, as discussed above, the effect on investment of such a rise in interest rates will not be large at all because interest rates are only one of many factors in company's decisions about whether to invest.
Avoiding One Last (Monetary) Mistake
The failure of the Bank of Japan to take sufficient steps to fight deflation represents the largest continuing danger to the Japanese economic outlook in 1999 and beyond. The contrast between the progress on the fiscal and financial policy fronts and the ongoing monetary mistakes, and between the Bank of Japan's deflationary stance and developments in other central banks around the world, could not be sharper.
It is true that nominal short-term interest rates have been near zero for some time, and that the BoJ has committed to “continue the zero interest rate policy . . . until deflationary concerns subside.”5 Nevertheless, real interest rates remain high (greater than 2%) for an economy with enormous unused capacity, and money supply growth has been limited (less than 5% in base money). Worse, real interest rates have been rising, given the negative trend in prices, and the yen has been appreciating of late against the dollar (see Figure 1, at end). The effect of central bank policy on an economy is the combined effect of nominal interest rates, real interest rates, and exchange rates. For a central bank to say it has done all it can by dropping its own nominal short-term rates is disingenuous.
The Bank of Japan remains capable of raising inflation—and reducing real interest rates—by printing yen to buy Japanese Government Bonds (JGBs) and U.S. dollars. To see why this is the case, some practical matters about monetary policy must be clarified. Even though a central bank cannot directly control long-term interest rates and the exchange rate, which are set by the market, it can significantly influence them. It is not necessary for the financial system to be in perfect condition, or for money demand to be perfectly stable (admittedly neither the case in Japan today), to get lending and exchange rates moving in the desired direction.
The only concern is that a central bank would not be able to hit an announced target accurately on a precise timetable. Yet, this is an unreasonable worry because central banks never precisely hit their announced targets, even when times are good—research shows that central banks which set numerical targets, even if only to miss them and then explain why in terms of ultimate goals, tend to gain more credibility from their transparency than banks which refuse to announce a target.6 People ultimately judge central banks on policy outcomes. Deflation is not an outcome which will build faith in any central bank.
The failure of the Bank of Japan
to take sufficient steps to fight deflation
represents the largest continuing
danger to the Japanese economic
outlook in 1999 and beyond.
The best way for the Bank of Japan to counter deflation is to be transparent about its intent, and let private sector expectations do some of the work for them—in other words, to announce a positive inflation target.7 Of course, the announcement itself will not create inflation, but it will provide a nominal anchor for expectations to hold on to as monetary policy turns expansionary.
If agreement cannot be reached on an appropriately positive level for this inflation target, as unfortunately seems to be the case judging from released Monetary Policy Board minutes, the Bank of Japan should at a minimum replace its April interest rate commitment with one to an actual policy goal. The Bank should shift from a target of maintaining the level of nominal short-term interest rates (an instrument) to reducing the current degree of monetary tightness (an outcome). This would involve counteracting through unsterilized intervention any further rapid rise in the yen, as well as expanding the money supply through buying JGBs, in addition to keeping the nominal short-term rates it controls at zero. Sterilized intervention does not alter domestic monetary conditions or the price level, and therefore allows real interest rates (and the yen) to continue to rise.
The Bank of Japan's Monetary Policy Board statement following its meeting of September 21, however, made clear that currently the Bank has no intention of so doing. In fact, the Bank appears to being committed to doing the opposite—sterilizing whatever minimal effect on prices would arise out of exchange rate intervention, and targeting nothing but the short-term nominal interest rate. The Bank clearly fears more from the good news of signs of financial reform and consumer recovery than from the downside risks of deflation. This is a dangerously mistaken assessment.
Japan in the 1990s has reacquainted us with all the arguments from the 1930s of why deflation is a bad thing: it encourages people to withhold consumption because they expect prices to fall. It raises the real burden of outstanding debt on already borrowed loans. It puts pressure on the financial system. On the other hand, just from looking at the other nations of the OECD it can be seen that a temporary inflation rate of 2-3% has minimal or no costs to growth.8
The theoretical concern, which seems to be of greatest concern to the Bank of Japan at the moment, is that any central bank monetization of government debt would erode the credibility of the central bank. Public demands by Japanese cabinet officials last December through February for bond purchases have given the Bank the impression that it would be seen as caving in if it pursued this policy. Central bank independence is, however, a means to an end of good monetary policy, not a blind commitment to refusing any policy request, no matter how reasonable, just because it happens to come from elected officials.
Central bank independence is, however,
a means to an end of good monetary
policy, not a blind commitment to
refusing any policy request . . .
While the Bank of Japan is indeed newly independent of Ministry of Finance control (since April 1997), it is not a maiden whose reputation will vanish overnight if it is touched once. In fact, central bank credibility is not as fragile as some would make it out to be. The German and Swiss central banks, the two most credibly anti-inflationary central banks in the world, have set long-term inflation goals of 2% rather than zero. They have also flexibly accommodated times of weakness in their economies by temporarily raising that target level.9
Moreover, the effect of money creation on inflation and on credibility is a matter of the economic environment. Economies where prices are falling and unemployment is rising are much less fertile grounds for inflation than economies which are pushed into operating above capacity, The current Japanese economy—despite the very real good news I mentioned at the start—is far from overheating. One can only be burnt by touching an oven if the oven is on. The reality in the current Japanese context is that the Bank of Japan would have to print even more money, and buy even more JGBs, than would typically be necessary in order to have the same effect on prices.
It was an independent central bank, the Federal Reserve, which made the American depression of 1929-33 “Great” by overestimating the dangers of expansion, and underestimating the dangers of deflation. That same central bank lost much of its independence into the 1950s, beyond the needs of war finance, because the results of its earlier deflationary policy eroded support for its independence. Let us hope that the Bank of Japan recoginizes that credibility is built on performance not symbolism, and becomes more aggressive in fighting deflation in the near future. Otherwise, the very real progress that Japanese economy is making due to good fiscal and financial policy might be offset by a monetary mistake.

Notes
1. The arguments in support of this analysis are given in Restoring Japan's Economic Growth.
2. Simon Wren-Lewis and Rebecca Driver argue that an equilibrium exchange rate for the yen is at 90 to the dollar (see the Institute study, Real Exchange Rates for the Year 2000, 1998), and Keidanren has expressed an ability to live with a dollar-yen rate of around 110 (likely indicating an actual ability to cope with a yet stronger yen). Such a rate would still leave Japan with a substantial current account surplus on the order of 2% of GDP.
3. For a discussion of past fiscal policies in Japan in the 1990s, especially of the implementation of stimulus plans that were too small and less than announced, see Restoring Japan's Economic Growth, Chapter 2.
4. See the studies for the IMF by Alberto Alesina and Roberto Perotti summarized in the May 1996 IMF World Economic Outlook.
5. Bank of Japan, “On the Current Monetary Policy,” Monetary Policy Board Public Statement, September 21, 1999.
6. For a discussion of central bank targets and transparency, see Kenneth Kuttner and Adam Posen, “Does Talk Matter After All? Inflation Targeting and Central Bank Behavior,” (PDF file) Institute Working Paper 99-10 (September).
7. I advocated a 3% target for Japanese CPI at a two-year horizon, then to be reduced to 2%, in Restoring Japan's Economic Growth, Chapter 5.
8. One of several econometric cross-national studies documenting this fact is Michael Sarel, “Nonlinear Effects of Inflation on Growth,” IMF Staff Papers, March 1995.
9. Thomas Laubach and Adam S. Posen, “Disciplined Discretion: Monetary Targeting in Germany and Switzerland,” Princeton Essays in International Finance, December 1997.

A congressional coalition of strange bedfellows has recently attempted, and only narrowly failed in the House of Representatives, to constrain the use of the Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF) by the secretary of the treasury. On 15 July, the House rejected by 192-228 an amendment offered by Rep. Bernard Sanders (I-VT), cosponsored by eleven others and endorsed by several labor unions and lobbying groups, that would have required explicit congressional approval for loans from the ESF greater than $1 billion. This is the second floor vote in as many years on an attempt to renew temporary restrictions placed on the ESF after the Mexico crisis of 1995.1
Although those restrictions expired in October 1997, they hamstrung US leadership at the outset of the Asian financial crisis and arguably aggravated the crisis. These legislative efforts are likely to continue. If they succeed, limitations on treasury access to the ESF will slow the US response to future crises, constrain US leadership, and send the wrong message to foreign governments and the financial markets about international cooperation. Representing a step backward in the reform of the international financial architecture intended to inoculate the system from shocks, such efforts should be resisted vigorously.
The secretary of the treasury should
retain broad discretion in the use
of the ESF for stabilization loans
and foreign exchange intervention.

The secretary of the treasury should retain broad discretion in the use of the ESF for stabilization loans and foreign exchange intervention. The treasury should continue to manage the account conservatively, transparency could be strengthened, and congressional oversight can be made more consistent. The treasury can nonetheless continue to administer the account with wide latitude while remaining democratically accountable.
Critics of the ESF raise five objections:2 (1) the account is a secretive “slush fund”; (2) the treasury has strayed from the original purposes of the ESF; (3) loans from the account illegally or unconstitutionally circumvent the congressional appropriations process; (4) the mechanism by which the treasury can swap foreign exchange in the account for dollars with the Federal Reserve—“warehousing”— is a subterfuge and undermines the central bank's independence; and (5) stabilization loans create moral hazard.
However, a review of the history and evolution of the ESF and the procedures for reporting and oversight do not support these claims or a case for direct congressional controls over the account. After briefly considering the origin and history of the ESF, we address each of the critics' objections below.
History
The Congress and the Roosevelt administration created the ESF through the Gold Reserve Act of 1934. The basic purpose of the account was and remains the stabilization of exchange rates and the international monetary system. Congress delegated the management of the ESF to the secretary of the treasury and holds the executive branch accountable through its oversight. The Department of the Treasury has used the ESF primarily to conduct foreign exchange intervention; stabilization loans have been an important secondary activity of the account. Congress also provided that all income and profits from its investments and operations remain part of the ESF, which has thus grown over the decades to about $40 billion.
. . . Congress should . . .
leave the ESF alone.

Having labored in relative obscurity for most of its existence, the account was thrust into the spotlight and intense political controversy by the Mexican peso crisis of 1994-95. In January 1995, the Clinton administration asked Capitol Hill to approve an assistance package consisting of $40 billion in loan guarantees for the Mexican government. The new 104th Congress balked, however, and the administration resorted to extending a $20 billion line of credit to Mexico from the ESF.
Upon learning that the Clinton administration had switched to using the ESF in the face of congressional opposition to the loan guarantees, several members of Congress and outside observers charged that the will of the national legislature was being circumvented. The amount and the term of the loan to Mexico were indeed unprecedented in the history of the ESF. Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin nevertheless argued that assistance to Mexico was in the US interest, that a rapid response was necessary, and that the Gold Reserve Act gave him sole discretion over the use of those funds.
If it did not now exist, the ESF,
or something like it, would have to be created.

The financial crisis that began in Asia in the spring of 1997 and later spread to Russia and Latin America spawned a second set of financial rescues on the part of the international community. Although the International Monetary Fund (IMF) led those rescues, the contributions of national governments were important to the credibility and success of the stabilization programs. The ESF has remained the principal mechanism through which the United States contributes to such rescue packages, notably the recent package for Brazil, and it has attracted continued scrutiny in that role.
Secretive?
At the beginning of the ESF, when the secretary reported only to the president, and for several decades thereafter, disclosures about the account were indeed minimal. However, the transparency of the ESF has evolved greatly over time, to the point where Congress receives considerably more information about the account than it appears to use.
Soon after the creation of the ESF, the secretary's reports were submitted to the Congress as well as to the president, and then later made public. Since the 1970s, the treasury has reported to Congress on a monthly basis and to the public through the Federal Reserve on a quarterly basis. Each loan agreement with a foreign government is reported to Congress under the Case-Zablocki Act of 1972 (widely known as the Case Act). Consistent with this trend, the administrative expenses of the ESF were placed on the budget beginning in FY1980. Under the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, the treasury is required to deliver semiannual reports on broader matters of international economic policy and exchange rates, on which the secretary is to testify if called upon to do so, and in which policy matters pertaining to the ESF are discussed. These changes responded in part to the evolving desire for greater transparency of the ESF and accountability of the secretary in past operations while also preserving confidentiality, flexibility, and speed in current operations. Thus, the present-day ESF in no way resembles a “slush fund.”
Wayward?
The ESF has evolved in response to changes in the international monetary and financial systems. Since the 1930s, secretaries of the treasury have used the ESF for both foreign exchange intervention and international loans, most of which went to Latin American countries. The formal objectives of the ESF shifted from stabilizing the dollar in a narrow sense in the early decades to promoting “orderly exchange arrangements” and “a stable system of exchange rates” in a manner consistent with US obligations in the International Monetary Fund today.
A dramatic increase in international capital flows to emerging markets in the 1990s increased the demand for distress financing when those flows reversed, most dramatically in the case of Mexico in late 1994 and 1995. Those loan commitments, and a lengthening of the term of those commitments, thus reflect the increased size, speed, and reversibility of modern private capital flows. (Highly mobile capital could also easily produce large movements in the dollar exchange rate in the future, prompting an increase in the volume of currency intervention.)
The ESF statute, its legislative history,
and decades of practice in the full view
of Congress establish the legality
of loans from the ESF.

Some critics argued that extending medium-term loans to Mexico stretched the legal mandate of the treasury. But the ensuing debate made clear that the secretary had acted within the law. The ESF statute, its legislative history, and decades of practice in the full view of Congress establish the legality of loans from the ESF. Although the president must report and justify to the Congress loans that are longer than six months, neither the statute nor the legislative history imposes any limitation on the term over which funds can be lent from the account. Apart from the two years during which the temporary restrictions (dubbed the D'Amato amendment after its principal sponsor) were in effect, there has been and remains no legal bar to offering medium-term loans to countries stricken by financial crises.
The secretary and the president do not possess, and obviously do not need, unrestricted authority to use the ESF as they please. Although the secretary has broad discretion, the treasury is constrained to use the funds for the purposes of the law. The ESF cannot be tapped for administrative expenses. The secretary cannot use the ESF as a source of “foreign aid,” defined as grants or forgiven or subsidized loans.
Unconstitutional?
Through the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, Congress created the ESF, endowed it with public money, and placed it at the disposal of the secretary of the treasury for the purpose of stabilizing the dollar. The secretary used the account for foreign exchange intervention and stabilization loans during the interwar period, and has continued to use it for these purposes to the present day. These activities are not only approved by Congress through law but also are reported to it and to the public regularly.
. . . the transparency of the ESF
has evolved . . . to the point where
Congress receives considerably more
information about the account than
it appears to use.

During the Mexican peso crisis of early 1995, Congress did not approve the Clinton administration's initial plan to extend loan guarantees from the federal budget. This reluctance clearly indicated that proceeding with loans from the ESF would be politically risky. But congressional inaction in no way removed the treasury's standing legal authority to lend from the ESF at the secretary's discretion.
In many areas of foreign and domestic policy, congressional delegation of authority to the executive branch and independent agencies is extensive. Across a broad spectrum of issues, Congress manifestly prefers to delegate many individual decisions rather than make them itself, and to oversee the executive. The Supreme Court has consistently upheld the Congress's constitutional power to do so. Thus, the delegation of ESF authority to the secretary of the treasury is part of a broad and accepted pattern and is very much consistent with our principles of democratic governance.
Subterfuge?
Warehousing is the spot sale of foreign currency from the ESF to the Federal Reserve along with a parallel repurchase at some specified date in the future. It is designed to replenish dollars in the ESF when they have been sold or swapped for foreign currency. The treasury last availed itself of this facility in 1989 and 1990. When warehousing was first instituted in the early 1960s, the General Counsel of the Federal Reserve issued an opinion articulating its legal basis. Congress authorized the Federal Reserve in 1980 to purchase foreign securities, an affirmative action meant to facilitate the Fed's holding of foreign exchange. The counsel opinion, the 1980 law, and 35 years of practice disclosed to the Congress, would seem to consolidate the legal basis for warehousing.
. . . temporary restrictions placed on
the ESF after the Mexico crisis of 1995
. . . hamstrung US leadership at the
outset of the Asian financial crisis and
arguably aggravated the crisis.

Should the issuance of dollars to the ESF cause an undesired expansion of the money supply, the Federal Reserve can easily offset the liquidity effect through standard open market operations. Moreover, the Federal Open Market Committee decides on matters related to warehousing, such as the limits to be set on the facility. In the event that warehousing became so large as to complicate sterilization, the FOMC could refuse further drawings.3 It is therefore difficult to foresee any realistic scenario under which warehousing could undermine the independence of the Federal Reserve or domestic price stability.
Moral Hazard?
The problem of moral hazard is very real, of course. International financial stabilization shares this problem with many other areas, such as fire and consumer protection and insurance. But most reasonable people would not argue for the abolition of fire departments because homeowners could become complacent. The appropriate solution is to balance the costs of complacency against the costs of fires and to limit moral hazard through fire codes. Using the ESF sparingly, requiring the equivalent of collateral, and making ESF loans conditional on policy reform—combined with oversight—provide safeguards against moral hazard while maintaining an effective capacity to fight financial “fires.”
Conclusions
Foreign exchange and international financial markets are imperfect, suffering from incomplete information, multiple equilibria, and problems of enforcement and cooperation among lenders, among other things. They are often driven, as a result, by herd behavior rather than rational expectations and produce speculative bubbles and liquidity crises rather than exchange rate and financial stability.
With loans from the ESF, the US government can provide liquidity to borrowers that are fundamentally solvent, preventing excessive downward overshooting of their currencies, smoothing their balance of payments adjustment, and reducing output and employment losses. By doing so, US authorities also reduce the adverse shift in the trade balance and associated output and employment losses in the United States. Currency stability and international liquidity foster open trade and investment policies around the globe, from which the United States and the rest of the international community benefit.
In legislative terms, the Congress should therefore leave the ESF alone. The secretary of the treasury should retain sole authority and wide latitude in the use of the account. Congress should resist any impulse to constrain the secretary's authority over or access to the ESF. In particular, Congress should not impose any new constraints on the use of the ESF for international financial rescues, including for medium-term credits when those might be necessary.
However, the secretary should also continue to manage the account conservatively by observing several basic principles of emergency finance, and should increase the transparency of the ESF, an area in which progress is currently being made. Congress should maintain consistent oversight of the secretary's administration of the ESF, a process facilitated by thorough reporting by the treasury on the account.
The ESF has remained the
principal mechanism through which the
United States contributes to rescue packages . . .

Six principles should guide the use of the ESF, most of which are already being largely implemented:
First, loans from the ESF should be issued sparingly. The treasury should make the account available only after borrowers have exhausted their access to the private financial markets and, preferably, other official creditors.
Second, loans should be conditioned on policy reforms within borrowing countries to correct economic problems and facilitate international adjustment.
Third, large medium-term loans should usually be made in parallel with programs administered by the IMF, which should continue to take the lead in negotiating policy conditions. The IMF is often better positioned to determine conditionality and has greater legitimacy in insisting on policy reform.
Fourth, ESF loans should be backed by a reasonably assured source of repayment and generally receive an interest rate premium, relative to the precrisis market rate.
Fifth, loans from the ESF should be effectively senior to the borrower's obligations to previous creditors.
Sixth, US officials should do their utmost to persuade private lenders and investors to also contribute to rescue packages—through some combination of debt relief, rescheduling, and new money—so that official financing does not simply substitute for private financing.
These principles are designed to maximize the likelihood that the financial operation will effectively stabilize markets, assure repayment to the treasury, encourage an early return to private capital markets, and minimize the moral hazard effects of official lending. They cannot be imposed rigidly on the credit activities of the ESF. The principles require flexible application in light of prevailing economic and perhaps political circumstances. Nevertheless, the secretary must respect the spirit of these principles when using the ESF for stabilization loans.
The ESF has been an important part
of the financial architecture in the past and
remains critical to any future set of arrangements.

When conducting oversight, members of Congress should ensure that these principles are respected. The Congress, and the banking committees in particular, have a litany of treasury reports and multiple opportunities to question the secretary and other treasury officials privately and publicly, and thus possess the tools necessary to exercise oversight relating to the ESF.
Three measures would nonetheless further strengthen transparency and oversight. First, the many reports that the treasury issues regarding the ESF and international monetary and financial policy more broadly could be streamlined, thereby economizing on scarce time of the treasury staff and provide “one-stop shopping” for Congress and the public. Doing so would require amending each of the several statutes that require the existing reports. Second, it would be desirable for the treasury to release ESF balance sheet information more frequently. The department could release monthly balance sheets with a few months' lag.
Third, more important, credit agreements with foreign countries, such as the 1998 agreement with Brazil, renegotiated in March 1999, should be released to the public. Such agreements are often classified out of deference to other creditors or to the borrower. Releasing these agreements should be part of the transparency agenda of the finance G-7, the IMF, and other international bodies.
. . . the present-day ESF in no way
resembles a "slush fund."

Disclosure to Congress is part and parcel of the broad delegation of authority to the treasury to manage the ESF. For its part, Capitol Hill must also recognize the substantial costs in staff time of reporting to Congress and strengthening transparency and should provide for them in budgetary appropriations for the administrative expenses of the treasury.
The United States, other leading countries, and the international financial institutions are searching for solutions to the global financial crisis and mechanisms to prevent and contain future crises. Former treasury secretary Rubin and current secretary Lawrence H. Summers have advocated designing a new international financial architecture that could lend greater stability to the international system. The ESF has been an important part of the financial architecture in the past and remains critical to any future set of arrangements.
In the absence of the ESF, international cooperation and US participation, let alone leadership, in international financial support operations would suffer considerably. Market confidence that governments could handle crises would decline. Governments of emerging-market economies would be tempted to backtrack on external liberalization. The intensification of international financial instability in recent years requires that the ESF be maintained rather than constrained. If it did not now exist, the ESF, or something like it, would have to be created. Truncation, or abolition, of the ESF at this point would convey a very negative signal both to markets and to other governments concerning the global economic role of the United States.
Notes
1. In July 1998, the House rejected by a slightly narrower margin a similar bill cosponsored by Rep. Sanders and Rep. Spencer Bachus (R-AL) that would have prevented the treasury from tapping the ESF for any international loan greater than $250 million. In the Spring of 1999, Rep. Jim Saxton (R-NJ) proposed that congressional approval be required for international stabilization loans greater than $1 billion and reiterated this proposal recently through the Joint Economic Committee. See Joint Economic Committee, “Transparency and U.S. Dollar Policy,” study by Robert E. Kelleher, July 1999.
2. These criticisms are contained in, among other places, floor statements by members of Congress (Congressional Record, 15 July 1999), Joint Economic Committee, op. cit.; statements by Lawrence Lindsey, Allan H. Meltzer, and Charles Calomiris before the Joint Economic Committee, The International Monetary Fund and International Policy, hearing, 24 February 1998, pp. 67-71; Anna J. Schwartz, R. Christopher Whalen, and Walker F. Todd, Time to Abolish the International Monetary Fund and the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund (Charlotte, NC: Committee for Monetary Research and Education, Inc., 1998); and the debate between the author and Allan Meltzer, “The U.S. Exchange Rate Stabilization Fund: Sleazy Slush Fund or Safety Net for the World Economy?,” The International Economy, July/August 1999, pp. 47-51, 63-64. With respect to the latter, see also C. Randall Henning, “Response to Prof. Meltzer,” The International Economy, September/October 1999.
3. In March 1990, for example, Vice Chairman Manley Johnson and Governors Wayne Angell and John LaWare argued against raising the warehousing limit, but were overruled by a majority of the Federal Open Market Committee. FOMC transcript, 27 March 1990.

William R. Cline, a senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics, is currently on leave as Deputy Managing Director at the Institute of International Finance. This Policy Brief summarizes the main findings and recommendations of his Trade and Income Distribution, published by the Institute for International Economics in 1997, which are of central importance to the current debate over trade policy and globalization.
The Problem
For most of the past 25 years, the distribution of wages in the United States has grown more unequal. The rising inequality is closely linked to educational and skill levels. Thus, the ratio of wages for workers with at least some college education to those for workers with high school education or less rose by 18 percent from 1973 to 1993 (figure 1).
Rising wage inequality might arguably not be a problem if it stemmed from a more rapid increase at the top of the distribution accompanied by some rise at the bottom as well. However, real wages have instead fallen in the lower part of the distribution. For most educational categories up through and including workers with some college, real hourly wages fell significantly from 1973 through 1993, with the greatest declines for the least educated (figure 2). Only the constant upgrading of the labor force, and the increased incidence of two-worker households, prevented real median household earnings from falling over this period.

Trade policy in particular has at times
been hostage to the fears of some
(including Ross Perot) that international trade
and globalization are reducing living standards
for American workers.

Although sustained growth and falling unemployment in the late 1990s have somewhat ameliorated the potential social pressures associated with widening inequality, and of falling real wages for many in the bottom half of the distribution, it is important to understand the sources of these trends. Trade policy in particular has at times been hostage to the fears of some (including Ross Perot) that international trade and globalization are reducing living standards for American workers.
The Literature
There is in fact a respectable basis in economic theory for the proposition that free trade will undermine real wages of those toward the bottom of the distribution. Economists Eli Heckscher and Bertil Ohlin developed in the 1930s the theory that a country exports goods that are intensive in the use of its "abundant" factor (for the United States, skilled labor) and imports goods that intensively use its "scarce" factor (unskilled labor). Economists Wolfgang Stolper and Paul Samuelson further developed this theory in the 1940s to show that it implied trade liberalization would reduce the real wages of the scarce factor and increase those of the abundant factor. Essentially, more export opportunities would bid up wages of those primarily producing export goods while increased competition from imports would tend to bid down wages of workers producing substitutable goods domestically.
Many other factors than trade, however, have played a role in trends for skilled and unskilled wages, notably including rapid technological change, deunionization, and an eroding real minimum wage. In the mid-1990s a large economics literature developed seeking to disentangle the relative contributions of trade and other influences. Implicitly or explicitly the economists contributing to this literature mostly shared the analytical framework shown by figure 3.
This framework views wages of skilled workers relative to those of unskilled workers (vertical axis) as the outcome of the interaction between supply and demand in the labor market. The quantity of skilled labor available relative to that of unskilled labor is shown on the horizontal axis. For example, as college education rises so does the ratio of skilled to unskilled workers available, as illustrated by the shift of the supply curve from S0 to S1. If the demand curve (initially at D0D0) does not move outward as rapidly, then the equilibrium skilled/ unskilled wage ratio will fall (from W0 to W1), as indeed happened in the early 1970s with the explosion in the number of college graduates. If, however, the supply of skilled relative to unskilled workers does not keep up with growing relative demand for skilled workers, then the equilibrium wage ratio rises over time, for example from W2 to W3.
The economic debate about the causes of widening wage inequality may be seen as primarily reflecting differing views on what influences are driving outward the demand curve for skilled relative to unskilled labor. Those who blame trade invoke such an outward shift from trade liberalization and falling transport and communications costs. Those who instead emphasize technology argue that "skill biased technical change" has caused a rapid outward shift in the demand curve for skilled relative to unskilled labor. For its part, immigration of unskilled labor can shift the relative-skills supply curve backward to the left (by increasing the number of unskilled workers in the denominator), causing the equilibrium skilled/ unskilled wage ratio to rise. In large part there has been a "trade versus technology" division among economists that has spanned the subdisciplines of labor and trade economics.
Labor Economists 1 - The first wave of empirical research was by labor economists who stressed technological change and found little if any influence from trade. As a leading example, Berman, Bound, and Griliches (1994) used sophisticated statistical techniques to show that changes in the sectoral composition of US production contributed little to the rising relative demand for skilled labor. Inferring that trade must therefore not be responsible, they concluded that instead technological change must be the driving force. However, neither they nor most others directly measured the impact of technical change (just as this influence in the earlier "sources of growth" literature typically defied measurement and was left as a "residual").
Labor Economists 2 - In contrast, another group of labor economists found larger international effects using a supply-demand framework. A prominent study by Borjas, Freeman, and Katz (1992) calculated the "labor embodied in trade," treating imports as analogous to an addition to domestic labor supply and exports as a subtraction. Applying the resulting implied changes in wages by skill type (considering existing estimates of wage response to labor supply), they estimated that up to 20 percent of the rise in the skilled/ unskilled wage ratio could be attributed to increased trade and immigration, and that the effect was even greater for those with below high-school education.
Trade Economists 1 - These estimates provoked a sharp response from some trade economists. In particular, Lawrence and Slaughter (1993) argued that the "Labor-2" group had misunderstood basic trade theory, and that once properly analyzed, trade could be shown to have had no effect at all on relative wages. They emphasized that Hechsher-Ohlin theory requires two conditions for trade to be reducing unskilled wages relative to skilled. First, trade must reduce the relative price of the imported goods using unskilled labor. Second, there should be a general shift across all industries toward greater use of unskilled labor and lesser use of skilled labor in each product line, to free up skilled workers needed for expansion of exports and absorb unskilled workers displaced by imports. They argued that the evidence contradicted both of these conditions: import prices had not fallen relatively; and rather than shifting in the required direction, the combination of skilled with unskilled labor had systematically shifted in the opposite direction across industries, toward greater skill intensity. The latter point, however, did not address the fact that the entire US economy had experienced a sharp rise in the relative availability of skilled labor. (In terms of figure 3, trade could have shifted the demand curve outward without provoking a generalized shift toward greater unskilled-intensity in each product, because of the simultaneous offsetting outward shift in the supply curve.)
Trade Economists 2 - Some other trade economists in turn reacted sharply to the first group of trade economists, to argue that trade had in fact major effects. Leamer (1993, 1994) reshuffled trade and industry data in a way that seemed to reveal the presence of falling relative prices for imports, and argued that factor combinations (skilled-unskilled intensities) did not have to change for trade effects to be present (citing the possibility of "fixed coefficient" production conditions). Wood (1994) made the most dramatic calculations of all. He adjusted skill intensities to account for low-skilled goods that had been totally transferred to developing countries, and applied some rough multipliers for effects in services as well as induced technological change, to estimate that 100 percent of the rise in the skilled/ unskilled wage ratio could be attributed to increased North-South trade.
After having been a prominent member of the "Trade 1" group, Krugman (1995) effectively switched camps. Using an illustrative "general equilibrium" model, he calculated that rising North-South trade might have raised the skilled/ unskilled wage ratio by about 3 percent, or one-sixth of the total, so the "Labor 2" estimates had been about right after all. He pointed out that by trade theory the relative wage change is considerably larger than the relative product price change, so that the corresponding decline in relative prices of imported goods might have been too small to distinguish from the statistical noise. At the same time, his general equilibrium formulation highlighted why the textbook "small country" case with domestic wages driven by the "international margin" of foreign wages under free trade (the driving force in the much larger estimates by Leamer) was misleading. In reality, for the US and other OECD economies, the home country is large and trade is small, and the supply-demand approach of the "Labor 2" economists provides a good approximation of reality.

. . . it does not follow that increased
trade protection would benefit
American workers.

New Estimates
I agree with Krugman's revised view that the Labor-2 group had come closest to the mark. A new general equilibrium model developed in Cline (1997) finds trade and immigration effects comparable to or somewhat greater than that school, but also shows that nonetheless they are unlikely to have been the dominant forces in rising wage inequality.
The Trade and Income Distribution Equilibrium (TIDE) model divides the world into 13 "countries" or regions. Using data for 1973, 1984 and 1993, it estimates production as a function of factors available in each country: skilled labor, unskilled labor, and capital (based on World Bank data). The model assumes falling transportation and communication costs over time, and similarly applies falling protection levels reflecting the successive rounds of trade negotiations. Each economy is divided into five sectors: three tradable (skilled-, unskilled-, and capital-intensive) and two nontradable (skilled- and unskilled-intensive). Sectoral exports are allowed to be up to half of domestic production, and imports up to half of domestic consumption. Trade must be balanced within 1 percent of GNP.
The market process is then simulated as follows. The model is run to determine the optimal allocation of each country's factors across products, and optimal levels of trade, to maximize the ("welfare") value of consumption in each "country." The value of one additional unit of skilled labor, unskilled labor, or capital in the optimal solution ("shadow price") then provides the basis for examining the ratio of skilled to unskilled wages in the market solution. Simulation shocks to the model then provide a basis for examining what would have happened to relative wage levels if trade and immigration had been different from their actual paths. The difference from the baseline path then tells the contribution of trade and immigration to changing skilled and unskilled wage levels over time.
The underlying structure of the model and the data developed immediately suggest two opposing underlying forces at work. There is an income-concentrating force from integration with the world economy - the traditional Stolper-Samuelson effect whereby the scarce factor (unskilled labor in the United States) tends to lose from increased trade. However, there is also an income-equalizing dynamic factor change effect. The reason is that skilled labor, starting from a very low base, has been building up much more rapidly in developing countries than in industrial countries, so the relative abundance of skilled labor in the United States (and relative scarcity of unskilled labor) has been diminishing over time.
In the baseline run, with no skill-biased technological change incorporated into production, the buildup of domestic skilled labor relative to unskilled labor supply in the United States from 1973 to 1993 has a potentially dramatic effect in reducing the relative wage of skilled workers. By the measure used (primarily, some college and above) skilled workers rose from 37 percent of the US labor force to 56 percent over this period. This should have meant that the relative wage of skilled workers would have fallen by 40 percent, rather than rising by nearly 20 percent. This paradox immediately suggests that there were strong offsetting unequalizing forces at work, and again skill biased technological change is one of the most likely candidates.
The counterfactual simulations then provide a basis for measuring the impact of trade. The model is rerun with transportation and protection costs held constant at their 1973 level, and the resulting solution shows that the ratio of US skilled to unskilled wages would have been 7 percent lower in 1993 than in the baseline. Another counterfactual adjusts US skilled and unskilled labor supply in 1993 to remove the contribution to each from immigration during the previous 20 years. In this experiment the optimal solution places the US skilled/ unskilled wage ratio 2 percent lower than in the baseline. These results are moderately higher than in the estimates of the "Labor 2" school. However, the model's finding of much larger other forces toward inequality means that these findings remain qualitatively within the same family of results finding that trade and immigration do not account for the bulk of rising inequality.
Synthesis
Table 1 reports an illustrative synthesis of the new estimates in Cline (1997) along with other estimates from the literature on other forces affecting US wage inequality. The table first shows that the equalizing force of rising relative skilled labor supply would have reduced the skilled/ unskilled wage ratio by 40 percent from 1973 to 1993 in the absence of other influences. The next section reports the contribution of each of several unequalizing forces to rising inequality. Altogether these forces must have amounted to amost a 100 percent rise in the initial skilled/ unskilled wage ratio for the net effect to have been an 18 percent rise (specifically: 1.97x0.6=1.18).
The table attributes a 6 percent rise in the skilled/ unskilled wage ratio to the impact of trade, based on the TIDE model and other model results in Cline (1997). It uses the TIDE estimate of 2 percent for the impact of immigration. The principal estimates in the literature are used for the central estimates shown for the impact of the falling real minimum wage (5 percent increased wage ratio) and deunionization (3 percent). There is still a large missing unequalizing force, and the table arbitrarily allocates half of this (rather than the entirety as often done) to skill biased technical change, and the remaining half to other unexplained influences.
Including a possible further impact of outsourcing, trade and immigration together thus account for a 9 percent rise in the relative wage over this period, or about half of the net increase. Nonetheless, trade and immigration remain far from dominant as the cause of rising inequality, because together they contribute only about one-tenth of the gross (total) unequalizing forces at work over this period.
Policy Implications
Despite the finding that trade probably has had some unequalizing impact, it does not follow that increased trade protection would benefit American workers. For one thing, probably about half of the impact of increased trade stems not from trade policy but from technological changes that have reduced transportation and communication costs. Moreover, simulations of the TIDE model and findings from earlier work (including on the distributional impact of textile protection costs) strongly suggest that while higher protection might reduce real skilled wages, it would do little to raise real unskilled wages. The efficiency losses (including dynamic effects) and the tendency for protection costs to be disproportionately concentrated on lower-income households offset the traditional Stolper-Samuelson absolute protection gains for the unskilled workers. This analysis also carries over to potential further trade liberalization. Little if anything would be gained for real unskilled wages through the avoidance of such liberalization, while its potential overall economic gains would be foregone if liberalization were to be halted. Moreover, the TIDE model projections for the next two decades show minimal adverse impact for unskilled wages from a scenario of complete removal of remaining protection.
What the findings do imply, however, is that the market process alone does not necessarily assure that the gains from trade are evenly distributed. This suggests in turn that a wide array of other equity-oriented policies should appropriately accompany a free-market (and free-trade) strategy. More narrowly, the results also suggest the potential importance of training and education in assuring that rising relative demand for skilled workers translates into broad advances for all workers rather than leaving behind a large cadre of unskilled. As for immigration, the findings suggest that it may be appropriate to take another look at the historic shift in recent decades toward family ties rather than skills as the criterion for eligibility.
The views expressed in this publication are those of the author. This publication is part of the overall program of the Institute, as endorsed by its Board of Directors, but does not necessarily reflect the views of individual members of the Board or the Advisory Committee
Figure 1: Skilled/unskilled wage ratio, 1961-93

Figure 2: Hourly wages by education, 1973-93

Figure 3: Interaction of Supply and Demand for Skilled/Unskilled Labor

Table 1: Illustrative Sources of Increase in the Ratio of Skilled to Unskilled Wages: United States, 1973-93 (percent)a
 


A. Equalizing forces
     Increase in stock of skilled relative to unskilled labor
-40
B. Unequalizing forces
     Trade: Stolper-Samuelson effects
          Lower transport and communication costs
          Trade liberalization
     Trade: outsourcing, Hicksian convergence
     Immigration
     Falling minimum wage
     Deunionization
     Skill-biased technological change
     Other unexplained
97
6 [3-10]
(3)
(3)
1
2
5
3
29
29
C. Net effect
18


a. Percentages for unequalizing forces must be chained, not simply added, to equal total unequalizing impact. Similarly, "A" and "B" must be chained to calculate "C".

Daniel H. Rosen is a visiting fellow at the Institute for International Economics. Senior fellows Gary Hufbauer, Marcus Noland, Jeffrey Schott, and director C. Fred Bergsten contributed to the analysis.
China's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) would affect the fundamental economic interests of both the United States and China. American opportunities to export to and invest in China would increase significantly. The United States would continue to apply the same, normal tariffs it has applied to imports from China continuously since 1980, but on a permanent basis instead of through annual renewals. China would ultimately be freed from quota restrictions under the Multi-Fiber Arrangement, which is being phased out as part of the WTO Agreement on Clothing and Textiles, enabling China to compete freely in the US market with other textile and apparel producers. The United States would agree to resolve trade disputes with China multilaterally as it does with the other 131 WTO members, rather than bilaterally.
The purpose of this balance sheet is to provide answers to six economic questions at the heart of the WTO accession debate in the United States:
What would be the impact of China's WTO accession on US exports?
What would be the impact of China's WTO accession on US imports?
Are China's proposed terms of accession a good deal for the United States?
Will the United States see its leverage to compel Chinese reforms diminish once WTO membership is granted?
Will China abide by its WTO commitments and obligations?
If the deal is so good for the United States, why is China willing to accept it?
These six questions reflect the economic aspects of the debate over China's accession to the WTO. In addition, of course, accession entails sensitive political questions for both China and the United States. Further, some raise the basic issue of whether a growing China is good for the United States-including in security terms. These issues are not addressed in this Policy Brief. Our answers to the economic questions, however, strongly support the case for Chinese accession to the WTO from the perspective of both US and Chinese national interests.
China in the WTO and US Exports
WTO accession will formally commit China to dramatically reduce its tariff and nontariff barriers to imports of foreign-made goods and services. The effect of WTO accession on world exports and US exports to China, given the provisional Chinese commitments summarized by the office of the US Trade Representative (USTR) in its press release of April 8, 1999,1 can be estimated with a partial equilibrium model (see Appendix). Using this model, the induced increase in world exports of goods and services to China can be estimated at $21.3 billion. The immediate increase in US exports of goods and services to China can be estimated at $3.1 billion.
. . . the induced increase in world
exports of goods and services to
China can be estimated at $21.3 billion.
The immediate increase in US exports of
goods and services to China can be
estimated at $3.1 billion.
This conservative estimate is based in large part on the widely cited Institute for International Economics study Measuring the Costs of Protection in China published in November 1998.2 The $3.1 billion estimate represents about 13 percent of correctly measured 1998 US exports of goods and services to China of $22.9 billion.3 As a static analysis, the Institute's study-carried out by a team of prominent Chinese economists-provides the basis for a fairly secure minimum estimate of the potential US export gains from liberalizing Chinese import barriers.
This estimate reflects only the static impact of liberalization, because the 1998 Institute study examined dynamic effects only in a few selected markets. A fully dynamic analysis would show much larger gains as competition takes hold in the Chinese marketplace. For example, taking into account effects such as increases in foreign direct investment that could follow liberalization, Goldman Sachs estimates that China's accession to the WTO could translate into $13 billion in additional US exports by 2005.4
China will continue to reduce its import barriers to some extent regardless of WTO accession, in order to promote domestic restructuring and growth. Accession could help deepen and accelerate Chinese liberalization, however. Formalizing the commitments in the WTO would keep Chinese liberalization on track as resistance inevitably arises from affected domestic sectors. It would give China's trading and investment partners much greater predictability regarding Chinese commercial barriers. And it would provide better enforcement were central or provincial authorities to neglect their economic commitments.
US Imports and the US-China Trade Deficit
Opponents of China's WTO accession commonly point to Chinese bilateral trade surpluses with the United States, condemn them as malignant, and assert that they will continue growing at a rapid pace in the future "if China is allowed into the WTO."5 This chain of logic is bizarre: since the existing bilateral surplus takes place in the absence of WTO membership, it is not clear why accession would cause a further increase in the Chinese trade surplus. Indeed, if US imports from, and exports to, China grow at the same rate in the future, the bilateral deficit will continue to expand simply because the base level of imports exceeds the base level of exports.
Table 1 summarizes best estimates of the US-China trade balance in goods and services, as carefully compiled and measured by Fung and Lau. However, bilateral trade balances are a misleading index of the gains from international trade. The United States gains from both exporting to China and importing from China. China likewise gains from trade in both directions.
Table 1: Adjusted Estimates of US-China Goods and Services Trade, 1992-98 (US$ billions)


 
US Goods 

US Services 

US-China Bilateral 

Year
Imports from
China, f.o.b
Exports to
China, f.o.b.
Imports from
China
Exports to
China
Balance, Trade in Goods and Services


1992
18.7
9.5
1.1
1.6
-8.7
1993
22.6
11.6
1.4
2.0
-10.4
1994
28.4
12.6
1.6
2.1
-15.2
1995
33.9
16.1
1.8
2.6
-17.1
1996
38.5
17.2
2.1
3.2
-20.1
1997
47.9
18.1
2.3
3.7
-28.4
1998
55.8
18.9
2.5a
4.0a
-35.4


Source: Fung and Lau, 1999
a. Estimated by the Institute based on historical growth.
Moreover, China does not run chronic global trade surpluses à la Japan. China's foreign exchange reserves are sizable, but they are only modestly, if at all, larger than the country's foreign debt; China is not a substantial creditor country. China has in fact run consistent global surpluses only since 1994, and may record a deficit in 1999.
Equally important, most of the growth in the US-China trade imbalance does not result from production moving from Toledo to Shanghai but rather from China's success in capturing US markets previously held by other East Asian economies. Noland uses a "constant market share" (CMS) model to demonstrate this point.6 The CMS model compares observed changes in trade flows with changes expected from past experience. Noland's model shows that, by 1997, China was shipping more to the United States than expected on the basis of China's average market share since 1993. In other words, China was taking production away from somebody else.
But the numbers show that the "somebody else" generally was not an American firm. In 1997 Chinese exports to the US market exceeded the "constant market share" expectation by $10.1 billion. Of this, the amount displacing third-country exports totaled $7.6 billion.7 Net US production displaced by increased Chinese export competitiveness in 1997 therefore stood at just $2.5 billion-about 5 percent of total US imports of goods and services from China. The conservative $3.1 billion estimate for increased US exports following implementation of China's WTO commitments more than offsets this marginal Chinese displacement of US production.
In sum, the trend in US-China trade has been for Chinese producers to take market share from Koreans and Thais, for example, rather than from US producers. In the important textile and apparel sectors, Chinese accession would mainly mean more Chinese competition with other foreign producers. As the phase-out date of 2005 approaches, the WTO's Agreement on Clothing and Textiles (ACT) will eliminate the quotas affecting all 132 WTO members. China's inclusion in this process would mean little if any net increase in US clothing imports but simply smaller shares of the US market for other exporting nations.
Some US officials have expressed a desire to negotiate a "surge provision like we got from Mexico in NAFTA" to cover unanticipated jumps in imports from China since the United States would forgo unilateral action to control the "surges" from China after it joins the WTO. NAFTA does indeed include such a provision, creating a mechanism to monitor trade so that parties to the agreement can anticipate rapid import growth that may cause harm to an industry before that industry complains. Its implementation requires agreement among the three NAFTA members, however, and it has been used only once: with respect to tomato shipments from Mexico to the United States.
The key issue again seems to be textiles and apparel. The United States has occasionally sought to use the "surge" provision of the Multi-Fiber Arrangement but has frequently been thwarted by the Textiles Monitoring Body of the WTO. The overriding economic point is the one made above: that any increase in US textile imports from China will simply replace similar imports from other countries, and that any special limitation on Chinese sales will, perhaps with a short time lag, lead to offsetting sales from other suppliers.
The United States can of course use the general safeguard, antidumping, and countervailing duty provisions of the WTO against China once it becomes a member of the organization. This combination of WTO-consistent devices should be sufficient to enable the United States to maintain adequate protection against unfair competition from China and even from fair competition that injures an American industry.
Report Card
Opponents of Chinese accession want to keep China out of the WTO so that retaliatory restrictions and punitive duties can more easily be placed on imports from China. The critics argue that China has a long way to go before becoming a market-oriented economy: they therefore want to retain a "non-market economy" (NME) designation for China and thus use a "comparator" market economy for the purpose of calculating antidumping duties. The comparator most often suggested is India.
In light of these arguments, it is worth looking at a "report card" on China's provisional terms of accession, as summarized by the USTR in its April 8, 1999, press release. These terms can be compared with the international WTO commitments of India, a GATT member since 1947.
Our scorecard ranges from better (than India), to equal, to worse for eight key areas compared in table 2.
The results show that, while India today has a more predictable trade regime than China (largely thanks to its membership in the WTO), the provisional Chinese accession commitments are significantly more liberal than India's current obligations. As China moves to fully implement its WTO commitments, it could achieve a greater degree of market orientation than exists in India today. In fact, China's accession would put pressure on existing WTO members, including India but perhaps also Korea and even Japan, to further open their own markets in a bout of competitive liberalization. It is also important to note that Chinese entry will be immediately followed by the entry of Taiwan, which will therefore further liberalize its trade regime as well.
Table 2: Scorecard on China v. India


 

India


China


Score

 






Accession to GATT
1947
1947; vacated 1950
 
Population (1997)
961 million
1,227 million
 
GDP (1997)a
$374 billion
$1,055 billion
 
GDP per capita
$390
$860
 
Share of world trade:
Exportsb
Imports

$33.9 billion (0.8%)
$40.4 billion (0.9%)

$182.7 billion (4.4%)
$142.4 billion (3.3%)
 
Tariff bindings
By 2005, 40% for finished goods; 25% for intermediate. 67% of tariff lines bound. Weighted average tariff will be about 30%.
By 2005, average tariff about 9.44% (with a few exceptions). All tariff lines bound.
Better
Agriculture
Tariffs in 0-300% range from WTO tariffication.
Average tariff of 17% by end 2004. All tariff lines bound. No agricultural export subsidies. TRQs on soybean oil, wheat, corn, rice, wool, sugar, palm and rapeseed oils.
Better
Trade-Related Investment Measures
Notified and phased out nonconforming. Measures, except special auto local content, measure under WTO dispute.
Fully comply upon accession; no transition measures.
Equal/Better
Information Technology Agreement
Zero tariffs on 95 tariff lines by 2000; 4 by 2003; 2 by 2004; and remaining 116 IT products by 2005.
Most tariff lines to zero by 2003; rest by 2005.
Equal
Quantitative Restrictions
Remain on 2,714 tariff lines, 32% of total (mostly consumer goods). India seeking 6-7 year phaseout period from 1997.
Most phased out by 2002; rest by 2005 (incl. autos).
Equal/Better
Services
Limited commitments in banking, non-life insurance, reinsurance with regard to commercial presence; 51% ceiling for foreign equity stakes.
Telecom: committed to 25% foreign equity stake.
Financial services: 51% share in joint ventures in insurance within one year/wholly owned subsidiaries in non-life and reinsurance in 2 years.
Telecom: Up to 49% foreign stake and 51% in value-added and paging services within 4 years. Accept regulatory principles in basic telecom pact. AV: 49% foreign participation in dis- tribution of video and sound recordings.
Equal
Trade-Related Intellectual Property
Implement fully by 2000, except for product patents on pharmaceuticals, chemicals, microorganisms.
Agreed in 1992 MOU with US to comply with TRIPs standards and give pipeline protection to pharmaceutical patents. Upon accession would fully comply with TRIPs requirements.
Better
Subsidies
No industrial export subsidies.
No industrial export subsidies.
Equal


a. World Bank Atlas Method.
b. Data for 1997; excludes intra-EU trade.Source: Compiled by Jeffrey Schott, Institute for International Economics, based on USTR press release of provisional Chinese commitments (for China), and Uruguay Round Final Texts (USTR: Washington, 1994) (for India).
Similar conclusions are reached when comparing the tariff and nontariff barrier estimates for China against those of two more advanced economies: Japan and South Korea. Table 3, based on Institute for International Economics studies of all three nations' protection regimes, compares the barriers in these three Asian economies.
The results of these three studies on the costs of protection are not perfectly comparable but do suggest that the Chinese economy is more open than commonly thought. This is impressive given the less developed character of the Chinese economy, which stands decades behind South Korea and Japan in overall economic development yet compares well in trade protection terms. It suggests that WTO accession, with its further liberalization of China's economy, should start the countdown to the end of China's designation as a "nonmarket economy" for purposes of calculating antidumping or countervailing duties. China's provisional offer opened the door to an NME designation for a reasonable period beyond WTO membership; the United States should seek no further prolongation of that treatment.
Table 3: Import Barriers in China Compared to Japan and South Korea


Tariff equivalent of tariff and nontariff barriers
 
China
Japan
S. Korea
Tariffs

21.7


5


7.9

Tariff equivalent of nontariff barriers

22.1


173


30.7



Sources: Sazanami et al. 1994, Measuring the Costs of Protection in Japan; Kim 1996, Measuring the Costs of Visible Protection in Korea; and Zhang et al. 1998, Measuring the Costs of Protection in China, all from the Institute for International Economics, Washington.
Losing Leverage Or Gaining It?
With China in the WTO as a regular member, will the United States have gained or lost leverage to compel fair Chinese commercial behavior? With China in the WTO, the United States will no longer be able to use unilateral trade remedies such as Section 301 with abandon. However, enforcement of trade rules is a hallmark of the WTO. As of June 1998, the United States had won 17 of 19 cases it had brought to the organization's Dispute Settlement Mechanism (DSM) -an almost 90 percent success rate.8 The DSM can authorize retaliation by the United States and other countries against China for failure to make good on its commitments.
Under Premier Zhu Rongji's provisional terms of accession, China would commit to standards of behavior and liberalization that could not be expected were China to remain outside the WTO system. For example, China not only agreed to comply with DSM rulings but also consented to make non-compliance with TRIMs and TRIPs (see table 2) immediately actionable-a standard that China could not otherwise be held to. The enforcement leverage gained with China inside the WTO is superior to the present toolbox of unilateral US remedies, not least because it would have the authority of multilateral approval.
Is WTO Just "A Scrap of Paper"?
Opponents of Chinese WTO accession assert that China seldom abides by its international agreements. Hence, they assert, there is no reason to expect China to honor WTO commitments in the future. Is this a fair criticism?

China's inclusion in this process
would mean little if any net increase
in US clothing imports but simply smaller shares of the US market for other exporting nations.

A team of scholars at the Georgetown University Law Center have compiled a record of China's compliance with its recent obligations.9 Excerpts from their scorecard (table 4) suggest that China's record, though mixed, is better than the detractors think. This list grades compliance as either good, fair or poor.
According to this scorecard, China's compliance record is a mixed bag-like that of many emerging countries. China does not have an exemplary record, but it is wrong to say that China is a consistent cheater on international sovereign commitments. For example, as the USTR notes in the 1999 Trade Barriers Estimate (p. 61), regarding compliance with the 1995 and 1996 Memoranda of Understanding on Intellectual Property:
Based on the 1995 and 1996 bilateral IPR agreements and extensive follow-up work with Chinese officials, China now has a functioning system to protect intellectual property rights (IPR). Enforcement of intellectual property rights has become part of China's nationwide anti-crime campaign; the Chinese police and court system have become actively involved in combating IPR piracy. According to Chinese Government statistics, China seized some 35 million illegal audio-visual products from 1994 to year-end 1998. It has shut down or fined 74 assembly operations for pirated VCDS and seized over 20 million smuggled VCDs during the same period.

Over the almost two decades of its membership, China has been a good citizen in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank despite the many doubts raised about China's behavior prior to its Fund/Bank accessions. China should likewise be a "good citizen" in the WTO.
For their part, the Fund and especially the Bank have played critical roles in China's development. The Bank helped China develop its basic marketization strategy and contributed substantially to its integration into the world economy. Chinese observance of trade rules, whatever one's view of its past and present performance, will clearly improve more rapidly with China in the WTO as a full member than left outside as a perpetual aspirant.
Table 4: Chinese Compliance with International Agreements
While there is controversy about the degree of Chinese adherence to international agreements (treaties governed by public international law as well as private commercial contracts) it is clear that a mixed, and somewhat improving, picture is the norm. Notably, Chinese compliance with sovereign treaties and agreements is superior to their enforcement of commercial agreements between private parties. The table below considers four areas relevant to China's WTO accession.


Area of Agreement
Compliance History
Scorea






Environment
Appears to meet core obligations of each agreement. Implementing agencies designated to "increase contact with the international community" taking their duties seriously and implementing enforcement protocols. However, China limits actions to the strict letter of agreements rather than spirit while efforts are underfunded, subject to regional inconsistency, and hindered by poor technical skills.
Fair
Intellectual property
Enacted first copyright law in 1991 and harmonized laws with international standards in 1992. Enforcement efforts have shown fruit, as seen by the closure of 15 of the 31 factories investigated following the 1995 US-China memorandum of understanding on enforcement of intellectual property laws. However, the United States complains that China cracks down on distributors more than producers of counterfeit goods. Compensation for infringement is inconsistent due to dearth of specific provisions and judges' inexperience. Awards inadequate by international standards but increasing recently.
Good
Private agreements
China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission (CIETAC) dominates arbitration of foreign-related disputes inside China. CIETAC is known to ignore some evidence presented by foreign parties and sometimes favor Chinese parties. Outcomes of venture capital disputes are mixed but even when favorable judgments for foreign parties are rendered, they are very difficult to enforce. Overall, far less dependable outcomes than when sovereign obligations are involved.
Poor to Fair
Nonproliferation
China acceded to the Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) in 1992 and in 1995 supported efforts to make the NPT permanent. Currently, Chinese compliance appears to be fairly comprehensive, but a colorful history of noncompliance and negligent oversight exists as well. For example, as of 1997, China continued to export specialized nuclear equipment and technology, primarily to Pakistan and Iran. Rogue Chinese enterprises, as opposed to government agencies, were partly to blame. Subsequently, pledges to stop nuclear exports to Pakistan and Iran were extracted and duly honored, but only in response to heavy pressure and compromise. As of 1999, China has terminated nuclear assistance to Iran, committed not to provide assistance to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities in Pakistan or elsewhere, and has strengthened internal export controls of nuclear weapons-related materials.
Fair


Source: Adapted from James V. Feinerman and Daniel Chang, Georgetown University Law Center, Washington. Based on research for Chinese Practice of International Law in the Post-Mao Era, forthcoming, Georgetown University.
a. The score assigned to Chinese compliance in each area is the author's, based on Feinerman and Chang's text.
Is Growth Strategy Destiny?
Reasonable people can examine the same Chinese WTO offer and come to very different conclusions about the value of individual accession terms for the United States. Washington experts may be intimately familiar with the nuances of phyto-sanitary barriers but fail to grasp the fundamental Chinese strategy that will determine that country's long-term trajectory.
For example, the latest paper from the Economic Policy Institute (EPI) suggests that China is experiencing relatively strong growth and high inflation.10 In fact, growth is now far slower than in earlier years of the reform period (perhaps as low as 4 percent in 1999) while the country is mired in profoundly serious deflation (prices fell more than 3 percent in the latest quarter). No wonder the EPI conclusions opposing Chinese entry seem odd.
A review of basic Chinese conditions is essential so that all parties to the debate can agree on the fundamental forces motivating Chinese economic interests and behavior. Three key macroeconomic factors dominate the landscape of China's economic development today:
Exports in traditional export sectors are flat or falling, and growth in the stock of foreign direct investment (FDI) is stalled. With China's trade surplus falling 61 percent in the first 5 months of 1999, economists are openly discussing the possibility of a Chinese current account deficit this year. FDI, meanwhile, has fallen markedly from 1998 levels, especially from overseas Chinese investors least likely to attach demanding strings to their investments.
Bold fiscal policy outlays are priming the economy but they may also be stretching the government's borrowing capacity. With the debt-to-GDP ratio growing rapidly, the tax base barely growing at all, and large new demands emerging for government social spending, the government spending route faces real limitations.
Domestic consumption is stagnant despite interest rate cuts and other incentives designed to stoke demand, largely due to widespread economic insecurity. Deflation threatens to erode confidence further. Spurring private consumption among conservative Chinese households has proven so difficult that authorities are talking up fragile stock markets in hopes of engendering a US-style "wealth effect."
Faced with this confluence of problems-none of which has been a major issue since 1978, let alone all three together-China's leadership has chosen to push ahead with the WTO process. With export-led, investment-led, and consumption-led growth strategies on the ropes, Premier Zhu is attempting a radical "fourth way": competition-led growth.
China's entrance into the WTO is a key instrument needed to heighten foreign and domestic competition against entrenched state-owned and monopolistic firms. If it succeeds, competitive pressures will galvanize Chinese companies and foreign enterprises in China alike. Competition would then in turn spur productivity, boost profits, inspire investment, and make clear where scarce resources are to be deployed most productively. If Premier Zhu fails to set China on this "fourth way," however, there is a significant chance that the economy will run out of steam. Projections of 6 percent-plus growth over several decades could become a curiosity.
Conclusion
For China, WTO membership is not a tactical step to outsmart its trading partners. Rather, the WTO is part of a broader strategy to lock in a tenuous transition from communism to a market economy. The United States has taken a very tough negotiating stance in the 13-year history of bilateral WTO accession talks with China. To a great extent, that position has been compatible with China's self-selected policy of rapid economic reform and opening, which is why opportunity exists for agreement in 1999.
But WTO accession is just one tool that China's reformist leaders can use to manage the most populous nation in the world. They cannot deplete their energies on WTO concessions to the exclusion of all other agendas. That would be a recipe for their ouster.
WTO accession, with its further liberalization
of China's economy, should start the
countdown to ending China's designation
as a "nonmarket economy" for purposes
of calculating antidumping or
countervailing duties.
The United States, in turn, must recognize its own clear interest in Chinese accession. Chinese economic gains would complement, not diminish, other US policy goals. Further Chinese consumption growth and marketization, for example, will continue to abet political reforms. In light of these interests, the three remaining US "demands" used to justify failure to embrace Zhu Ronji's bold overtures-indefinite protection for textiles and apparel, indefinite extension of NME designation, and indefinite application of a less liberal surge protection mechanism-look particularly foolish.
We know from history that it is critically important to engage rising superpowers in the global leadership structure on a timely basis. Germany was declared a pariah by the Treaty of Versailles after the First World War and had already felt rejected by the global leadership in the late nineteenth century, with results that were disastrous in security as well as economic terms. Japan perceived similar rejection, both before and especially after the First World War, with equally calamitous consequences. A failure to integrate China now would risk repeating these historic follies, on the downside, and risk passing up an opportunity to bolster a highly desirable reform process on the upside.
The United States will achieve substantial economic and political benefits from Chinese entry to the WTO. President Clinton therefore should have accepted Premier Zhu's offer in April. Developments in both countries have made it harder to reach agreement subsequently, and further delay may complicate the process even more. It would be an enormous blunder for the United States to slam the door on China's reformist leaders and deny itself, and the world, the trade liberalization that those leaders are prepared to offer in the middle of 1999.
Appendix: Estimated Static Impact of WTO Accession On Chinese Imports, 1997 (US$ billions)
Total c.i.f. value of Chinese importsa

 


 

Merchandise, of which

 


$150.0

Highly protected

54.2


 

Other

95.8


 

Service, excluding insurance and freight on goods imports

 


16.7


Total


 


$166.7

Projected increase in Chinese importsb

 


 

Merchandise, of which

 


$18.2

Highly protected

10.2


 

Other

8.0


 

Services, excluding insurance and freight on goods imports

 


3.1


Total


 


$21.3

US exports to China, 1998

 


 

Merchandise total, of which

 


$18.9

Direct

14.4


 

Via Hong Kong

4.5


 

Services

 


4.0


Total


 


$22.9

Projected increase in US exports to China

 


 

Merchandise, of which

 


$2.3

Highly protected

1.3


 

Other

1.0


 

Services

 


0.8

Total

 


$3.1

Source: Gary Hufbauer, Institute for International Economics
Notes:
a. Fung and Lau, 1999.
b. Based on calculated WTO-induced gains in Chinese imports as follows: (1) highly protected merchandise and all services, 18.8%; (2) other merchandise imports, 8.4%. These calculations reflect the assumption that tariff (21.7%) and nontariff barriers (22.1%) on highly protected merchandise add to a 43.8% tariff equivalent; that the tariff barriers are cut by 60%; and that the nontariff barriers are cut by 40%, yielding overall liberalization for the goods of about 50% from pre-WTO levels. For other merchandise, the average pre-WTO tariff is estimated at 24.6%, and tariff liberalization is assumed to be 60%. The response parameters are based on Zhang et al.'s 1998 Measuring the Costs of Protection in China, Institute for International Economics, Washington.
Notes
1. The summary is available at http://www.ustr.gov/releases/1999/04/ch-memo.html. While it is not a jointly agreed text, Chinese officials confirmed informally at the time that the content reflected the state of negotiations. In the wake of the US rejection of their proposals, these officials have emphasized that they no longer feel bound by them.
2. Zhang et al., 1998.
3. K.C. Fung and Lawrence Lau, "New Estimates of the United States-China Bilateral Trade Balances," Asia/Pacific Research Center, Stanford University, April 1999. The Fung and Lau corrections address varying custom valuation methods, reexport and markup of trade through Hong Kong and trade in services.
4. Fred Hu, Goldman Sachs (Hong Kong), Global Economics Paper No. 14, April 1999.
5. See "China Can Wait," (p. 7), by Robert Scott, Economic Policy Institute, Washington, June 1999.
6. Marcus Noland, "US-China Economic Relations," in Robert S. Ross, editor, After the Cold War: Domestic Factors and US-China Relations. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1998.
7. While the model does not say which third countries, we do know for example that the US bilateral trade balance with Hong Kong has improved in recent years despite large increases in our global deficit.
8. Jeffrey J. Schott, "The WTO: Progress to Date and the Road Ahead." In Jeffrey J. Schott, ed., Launching New Global Trade Talks: An Action Agenda (Institute for International Economics: Washington, 1998.)
9. The author is grateful to James Feinerman and Daniel Chang of the Georgetown University Law Center for contributing this material. The characterizations of Chinese compliance performance based on Feinerman and Chang's analysis are entirely the author's.
10. Robert Scott, "China Can Wait," available on-line at http://www.epinet.org/briefingpapers/china.html.
The views expressed in this publication are those of the author. This publication is part of the overall program of the Institute, as endorsed by its Board of Directors, but does not necessarily reflect the views of individual members of the Board or the Advisory Committee.

Gary Clyde Hufbauer is Reginald Jones senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics. Erika Wada is a Ph.D. candidate at Michigan State University and research assistant at the Institute for International Economics. © Institute for International Economics. All rights reserved.
One of the most bizarre bills making its way through Congress is the Visclosky steel quota bill (H.R. 975). H.R. 975 passed the House on 17 March, with 289 yeas and 141 nays. It is scheduled for a Senate vote on 22 June. If enacted, H.R. 975 would limit steel imports in a heavy-handed way that scarcely benefits workers, but enriches a few lucky firms, while violating international trade rules and draining the pockets of American households. If truth-in-labeling applied to legislation, H.R. 975 would be named the Steel Lottery Act of 1999. The annual cost to American households for each steel job saved would exceed $800,000. But steel workers would receive less than 20 percent of this huge sum; lucky firms would collect more than 80 percent of the jackpot.
One curious feature of H.R. 975 is that it would augment an array of import relief measures already obtained by the steel industry. Beginning in mid-1998, the industry mounted antidumping and countervailing duty cases against steel imported from Japan, Brazil, Russia, and several other countries. In response, the Commerce Department announced penalty duties ranging up to 67 percent on Japan, 86 percent on Brazil, and 200 percent on Russia; confronted with these duties, a few countries have “voluntarily” agreed to limit their exports. More restraints of this sort are still working their way through the system.
Even more curious, the steel industry has not filed a petition for “escape clause” relief. Like the antidumping and countervailing duty penalties, escape clause relief is consistent with WTO rules. Unlike penalty duties, however, escape clause relief applies to all foreign suppliers, it demands a showing of serious injury, it is time-limited (ordinarily 4 years), and it requires the industry to make meaningful plans for adjusting to competition in the world market. These conditions may explain the industry's reticence to petition the International Trade Commission for escape clause relief.
. . . the jobs of only 1,700 workers
(would be saved) at an annual cost
(paid by American households)
exceeding $800,000 per worker.

In any event, not satisfied with existing and potential WTO-consistent remedies, integrated steel firms and their unions have made H.R. 975 a top legislative priority. The announced goals of H.R. 975 are to save steel jobs and bring prosperity to depressed mill towns. The bill requires the Commerce Department to restrict US monthly imports of steel products for the next three years to the monthly average attained during the 36-month period prior to July 1997—about 2.345 million short tons per month. If enacted, steel quotas will do little to achieve their announced goals. But like a rigged lottery, steel quotas will drain small amounts of money from many households and enrich a very few firms.
Steel quotas will do little to arrest the downward trend of employment in steel production. In 1987, when the domestic industry produced 77 million short tons, steel employment was 163,000 workers. In 1997, when the domestic industry produced 106 million tons, employment was 112,000 workers. In other words, steel production is up and steel employment is down—the consequence of rising productivity (472 tons per worker in 1987; 946 tons in 1997). These trends will persist as efficient minimills (which already make 45 percent of domestic steel) extend their march across the country. Steel employment may continue to fall by about 5,000 workers per year over the next few years as inefficient integrated mills are closed, whether or not steel quotas are imposed.
Steel quotas will not open foreign steel markets, closed by informal cartels (the apparent practice in Europe and Japan) and government restrictions. To get at these restrictions, different tools must be used: aggressive negotiations that outlaw cartels and eliminate steel tariffs; and well-prepared WTO cases that attack illegal barriers (USTR is fighting a case of this sort aimed at EU steel subsidies).
Steel quotas will violate US international trade obligations. If the United States ignores its obligations and imposes quotas, other WTO members will be entitled to “compensation”. US protection in other sectors like agriculture and textiles would have to be reduced or other countries would be entitled to impose tit-for-tat restrictions on US exports, just like the United States has done against Europe in the banana dispute. Given the commercial power of the United States, other countries might be slow to demand compensation. But when they breach their own international trade obligations, other countries will surely cite the US dereliction as an excuse.
Most importantly, steel quotas are a very expensive means of saving a small number of steel jobs. Quotas will enrich lucky steel importers (often those with the best political connections) and efficient steel producers (they are doing well enough already—11 of the 13 largest mills earned more than $1 billion in 1998). This enrichment will come at the expense of American households. But sadly, quotas will not rejuvenate depressed steel towns: they will continue to lose ground to more efficient steel mills located elsewhere in the United States.
Steel quotas will do little
to arrest the downward trend of
employment in steel production.

The Institute for International Economics has developed a “plain vanilla” model to estimate in a rough and ready way the costs imposed by import quotas on households, the jobs saved in the protected industry, and the windfall riches delivered to favored firms.
Protection cannot create jobs in the economy as a whole. Otherwise every country could protect itself into prosperity—a failed recipe that contributed to the Great Depression of the 1930s. But a country can save jobs in a single industry by trade protection. And it can enrich lucky quota holders and successful firms at the expense of customers. In the case of steel, that means at the expense of anyone who buys an automobile, a refrigerator, or pays taxes to construct a bridge—in other words, nearly every American household.
Applying the Institute's model to the provisions of the H.R. 975, we can ask how the contemplated steel quotas would have changed the economic landscape in the 36 months prior to July 1997—the base period chosen by Representative Peter Visclosky. His bill would have limited imports in 19 of the 36 months prior to July 1997. In these 19 months, average steel imports exceeded the average for the entire 36-month base period: 2.669 million short tons versus 2.345 million short tons. If H.R. 975 had been US law at that time, it would have lopped off the average difference of 0.324 million short tons of “excessive imports” per month in these 19 months.
Steel quotas will violate US
international trade obligations.

Our plain vanilla model indicates that a forced drop in imports of 0.324 million tons a month would have boosted import prices in those months by about $29 a ton (this amount is mainly collected by lucky quota holders). It would also have boosted domestic prices by about $6 a ton (an amount mainly collected by successful steel firms). These price hikes would have extracted an annual average of $1.5 billion (about $125 million per month) from the pockets of American households, about $14 per household annually. Most of the jackpot money would have gone to lucky steel importers (windfall gains of $800 million) and efficient US steel firms (windfall gains of at least $400 million).
Steel workers would have been fortunate to receive $200 million in the form of pay packets for jobs saved and higher wages for workers already employed. Deadweight efficiency losses to the US economy would have run about $60 million annually.
How many steel jobs would have been saved? Our model says an annual average of about 1,700 steel jobs. Simple division reveals that the cost paid by American households for each steel job saved would have exceeded $800,000 per year. Of course nearly all of the $800,000 would go to winners of the rigged lottery, not to workers. Even allowing for a wide margin of error, this is an astonishing figure. Yet it is within the range of other estimates the Institute has made: for example, American households pay $400,000 annually for every job saved by high tariffs on ceramic tiles, $500,000 annually for every job saved by dairy quotas, and $900,000 for every job saved by tariffs on luggage. It turns out that trade barriers are a very costly way of saving jobs.
. . . steel quotas are a very expensive
means of saving a small number
of steel jobs.

The Visclosky bill would not shut out steel imports in each and every month. Because of fluctuating demand in the US market, imports are often lower than the base period benchmark established in the bill. For example, in February 1999, imports were 2.168 million tons by comparison with the base period benchmark of 2.345 million tons. But in March 1999, imports rose to 2.845 million tons. In other words, the bill would have permitted all of February imports, but shut out 500,000 tons of March imports. This kind of fluctuation highlights the disruption caused by monthly quotas: by shutting out steel imports in some months and permiting imports in others, they add to the logistical burdens on US users and foreign suppliers. The numerous House co-sponsors of the Visclosky bill possibly regarded “supply harassment” as an extra virtue of their legislative handiwork.
It is worth mentioning that the costs imposed by a monthly quota would soar in times of high US demand. For example, in the third quarter of 1998, when imports averaged 3.922 million tons per month, the annualized cost to American households would have exceeded $6.6 billion. To be sure, 6,700 steel jobs would have been saved during those three months, but at a cost approaching $1 million per steel job saved.
The dynamic US economy, which at full employment creates 2 to 3 million net new jobs annually, also lays off about 1.4 million workers annually, as plants close and firms downsize. Even when the economy is enjoying full employment, about a quarter of laid-off workers remain unemployed for several years. That fact alone provides a compelling argument for national training and relocation programs. But it is not an argument for a rigged lottery that would take $1.5 billion per year from American households, confer $1.2 billion of windfall profits on a few firms, yet save the jobs of only 1,700 workers at an annual cost exceeding $800,000 per worker.
One of the central issues arising from the Asian/global financial crisis is the relative role of the International Monetary Fund and the private markets in preventing further financial crises. Dr. Catherine L. Mann, senior fellow, draws on her experience in Washington policymaking at the Federal Reserve Board, the President's Council of Economic Advisors, and the World Bank and on her executive teaching at Vanderbilt University Owen School of Management and University of Chicago Graduate School of Business. © Institute for International Economics. All rights reserved.
Should the IMF be the international lender of last resort? It played the leading role in the financial dramas in Mexico, Asia, Russia, and Brazil. Both Stanley Fischer and George Soros want to place the IMF-cum-international lender of last resort at the center of the new financial architecture (Wall Street Journal and Financial Times, 4 January 1999). Indeed, the IMF is the only institution that can coordinate large and immediate injections of credit when fast-moving global financial panics overwhelm sovereign nations and threaten to undermine international finance, global trade, and world growth.
However, there is a missing actor. There is no supranational supervisor, and there will not be one. No sovereign nation will give over to a supranational entity the right to monitor and close its individual financial institutions. Yet, this supporting actor is critical to the effectiveness of the lender of last resort. So, even as we bolster the IMF's credit line for when needed, even extending funds at penalty rates to borrowers, we must severely limit the occasions when we resort to such financing.
This implies a more important role for the private financial community, as the actor not sufficiently or willingly involved. Private financial insurance instruments complement proposals to strengthen the IMF. They can differentiate borrowers and lenders, help mitigate moral hazard, and diversify risk to participants who can best bear it.
The International Financial System Needs a Creditor of Last Resort, Which the IMF Can Be
In the national context, the lender of last resort exists because distress at a single financial institution could spill over to sound financial institutions, thus impairing the conduct of the whole system. Although financial institutions should accurately price and manage their own risks, no financial institution prices into its services the costs of contagion. Nor should it, since doing so would lead to an inappropriately high price and thus to too small an amount of financial intermediation. Because the economic benefit of the financial system as a whole exceeds that created by individual firms, there is a rationale for very occasional intervention by a lender of last resort to prevent contagious spillovers.
Because the economic benefit
of the financial system as a whole
exceeds that created by individual firms,
there is a rationale for very occasional
intervention by a lender of last resort . . .

In today's global environment, national economic well-being increasingly relies on global production, distribution, consumption, and the web of international financial transactions that binds them all together. Contagion from one national market to other national markets and the international financial system obviously happens, with great detriment to countries and to the system. A coordinated response of national lenders of last resort might obviate the need for an international lender of last resort. However, a single supranational credit institution is needed because national authorities may be unable to agree on an appropriate response within a time frame necessary to prevent disastrous contagion. Coordination failure among national institutions is a distinct possibility, due in part to the differences in their behavior and mandate. Moreover, if a domestic crisis becomes an international one, it may indicate that the national authority has failed.
But it Also Needs an International Supervisor, Which the IMF is Not and Should Not Be
Even as the backstop of possible intervention benefits everyone, it also alters the burden of public and private costs of a financial crisis. Governments, institutions, and investors may undertake excessively risky strategies when the possibility exists that the taxpayer will bear the negative consequences of those actions. These costs of moral hazard exist as the flip-side of ensuring maximum benefits from the financial system. Moral hazard cannot be eliminated, but we should try to mitigate it.
In the national context, the critical complements to the lender of last resort are regulation, supervision, and closure of financial institutions. On-going supervision of institutions is the quid pro quo for very occasional financial support from the central bank or taxpayer. Both the national lender of last resort and its associated supervisors are ever-present, are privileged to know which institutions are at greatest risk, and most important, can take prompt corrective action to improve or close an afflicted institution.
No sovereign nation will invite
constant oversight of its financial
institutions by a supranational entity, nor give
to that entity the right to close some of them.

Is there an international analog? The Basle Core Principles draw out best-practice from national financial regulations, but the Bank for International Settlements is not the international supervisor! The IMF Article IV consultation process does address the soundness of financial institutions and the supervisory process. But, IMF credit and conditionality are provided only in crisis times and to governments rather than to private financial institutions, and all countries step down from IMF conditionality as soon as possible. And the threat of penalty rates is insufficient to prevent misguided behavior. In sum, there is no international supervisor that has the same knowledge, presence, and clout as does the national supervisor in its own domain. No sovereign nation will invite constant oversight of its financial institutions by a supranational entity, nor give to that entity the right to close some of them.
What to Do? Fund the IMF, But Demand More From the Private Sector.
It is unrealistic to suppose that there will be no international lending of last resort; some countries and some of their banks or companies will be supported in times of financial distress because of the possible international systemic consequences. The IMF cannot print its “money” (the SDR) at will like a national lender of last resort, so the IMF must be reinforced as coordinator of international credits and must have sufficient funding to be credible.
However, at the same time, we must limit moral hazard by reducing the frequency of occasions when IMF credit is directed at stabilizing the global financial system instead of its principal role, which is to ameliorate individual macroeconomic imbalances. The fundamental way to avoid systemic financial distress is to make sure that borrowers and lenders accurately price and manage risks in their own portfolios.
What makes financial markets work well? The recipe has these ingredients: Market participants with different tastes for risk, armed with full information, and offered “complete” markets of financial instruments. What has been missing in recent years? Arguably, all three! First, market participants have appeared more herd-like than heterogeneous. The very narrow risk spreads on emerging market debt in early 1997 and the huge risk spreads following the collapse of the Russian effort point to lack of differentiation among borrowers as well a swing in collective sentiment completely out of line with changes in the underlying economic prospects of many of the countries caught in the financial maelstrom. Second, differentiation has been made more difficult by incomplete or wrong information revealed only very slowly by certain market participants. Finally, the market for financial instruments is incomplete, lacking in particular financial insurance against the rare events of credit downgrade or restructuring (e.g., delay in payment or rollover) of, in particular, short-term obligations.
Could financial insurance instruments, such as credit risk insurance or restructuring insurance, help to stabilize the international financial system? First, these instruments differentiate the market participants. Not all borrowers would offer insurance, and not all lenders would buy it. But for those that did, when the financial crisis hits, the insured lenders would not abandon the insured borrowers, at least not for the duration of the policy. For example, if they had bought financial insurance, pension funds that unloaded low-rated bonds would not have had to sell into a declining market. Banks that provision when payments are delayed might have followed a different strategy. Firms that had to write off intracompany receivables could have reported revenues.
Insurance could significantly alter
the herd mentality in the market by
diversifying the exposure of market
participants and by moving risk from
those who fear it to those who manage it.

Insurance could significantly alter the herd mentality in the market by diversifying the exposure of market participants and by moving risk from those who fear it to those who manage it. Slowing down the race to the exits could dramatically alter the self-fulfilling nature of some financial crises. Moreover, with at least some lenders buying insurance, intervention by the lender of last resort would be less frequent and moral hazard reduced.
Second, financial insurance splits the pricing of financial products into pieces that can then be priced separately. A financial relationship needs to consider two situations: the borrower-lender relationship during normal times and the relationship when the borrower is distressed. The interest rate on a loan or bond only prices the relationship during normal times. There is no interest rate high enough to pay off the principal of the loan or bond if a borrower defaults. In contrast, financial insurance prices in only the cost of default.
Get the Private Incentives Right to Reduce Intervention by Public Institutions
Who might develop these financial products? Private financial institutions have the technical ability to create financial instruments that will price default risk and diversify it to participants who can bear it. They performed a similar function in developing foreign exchange insurance after the breakdown of Bretton Woods. Now, ongoing structural change in the financial sector is bringing together these creditors and insurers. And, the insurance industry has its own diversification medium—the well developed re-insurance market. The IMF might yet have a new, limited role as the ultimate backstop to this market, just as a federal government often is the ultimate backstop for insurance for national disasters such as floods and earthquakes.
A key aspect of the demand for financial insurance is the presence or absence of international bailouts or orderly (e.g., IMF or public-sector coordinated) workout agreements. To the extent that creditors are made whole or partially whole through nonmarket mechanisms, the demand for insurance instruments will not develop. Why should any creditor pay for insurance if it gets an international bailout for “free” (as in tesobonos in Mexico in 1995) or if the costs of renegotiation of the terms of repayment are coordinated by an official third party (as in South Korea in early 1998)?
To the extent that creditors are made
whole or partially whole through nonmarket
mechanisms, the demand for insurance
instruments will not develop.

Can these instruments be created before the next financial crisis? An example from the 1980s offers hope. After the move to floating exchange rates, volatility in the foreign exchange market created the incentive for currency swaps and options so that investors could pay for insurance, in advance, against unexpected movements in exchange rates. In the current situation, the more difficult, drawn-out, ad hoc, and therefore costly are the financial disaster workouts, the greater are the incentives for investors to demand and institutions to offer instruments ex ante that will help to generate a market-oriented solution to the workout process. So rather than intervening more frequently, official institutions must stand aside.
Perhaps the Asian financial crisis has got us nearly to this point—perhaps Indonesia's hands-off moratorium and Russia's default will get us there faster. As to whether a market-oriented strategy reduces moral hazard and dependence on international lending of last resort, we will have to await the next financial debacle.

The Case for Rejecting Floating
If the foreign exchange market behaved as it is assumed to do in economics textbooks, with ubiquitous rational expectations the driving force, it is indeed difficult to imagine why anyone would not want to allow the exchange rate to float (at least for countries that do not satisfy the conditions to be part of an optimum currency area). Since most economists like to assume that their models do indeed describe the real world, to some reasonable approximation, it is not difficult to understand the appeal of floating to the profession.
The case for rejecting floating is based on the evidence that asset markets in general, and the foreign exchange markets in particular, are driven by herd behavior rather than rational expectations. The best documented case is that of the dollar bubble of the mid-1980s. Note that labeling this a bubble is not being wise after the event: Krugman (1985) and Marris (1985) both used economic analysis to demonstrate decisively ex ante that the dollar was overvalued. Frankel and Froot (1986, 1987) showed how the dollar bubble led portfolio managers to place overwhelming weight on "technical" (i.e., chartist) forecasts, with "fundamental" (i.e., economic) factors, as at least potentially determined by rational expectations, being essentially dismissed because of their repeated error over the preceding years in forecasting the reversal of the dollar’s rise. This dismissal in turn supported the dollar’s continuing levitation until the authorities realized that something had to be done to restore the dollar to a level consistent with the fundamentals. Some of us can still recall encountering rank disbelief on Wall Street prior to the Plaza Agreement when we explained that the dollar’s overvaluation would have to be corrected sooner or later.
. . . floating is undesirable because
of the extreme weakness of the economic
mechanism that holds the exchange rate
close to a level consistent
with the fundamentals. 
Subsequent events do not suggest that the dollar bubble was a one-off event, or that the markets have now learned the error of their ways. The yen’s great roller-coaster has been the principal recent event among the industrial-country currencies: practically everyone knew that the yen was overvalued long before it reached 80 yen to the dollar, yet it continued to and through that mark. The overshooting of the East Asian currencies (including the yen) in the second half of 1987 was even greater: while one can understand the extreme weakness of the Indonesian rupiah as a result of capital flight driven by fears about the political succession, no similar explanation is available for the other currencies of the region. There was instead an obvious and extreme lack of the sort of stabilizing speculation that theory says one has to rely on to stabilize a floating exchange rate (McKinnon 1979).
The suspicion about the behavior of the foreign exchange market aroused by these anecdotes is confirmed by the empirical evidence on floating exchange rates. For a while this empirical evidence suggested that exchange rates show no tendency to revert to equilibrium, but rather that they follow a random walk. It is still true that a random walk outperforms any of the structural models of exchange rate determination for time horizons of less than a year, but there is now pretty conclusive evidence that a floating exchange rate will tend to revert slowly toward relative purchasing power parity (PPP), with half the adjustment being completed in something under 5 years (Rogoff 1996). There is, however, also evidence to support the theoretical presumption that the equilibrium real exchange rate can change, rather than being a permanent constant as the PPP model assumes (see the papers in Williamson 1994). One can reconcile this with the empirical success of the long-run relative PPP model if random deviations from equilibrium tend to be large relative to changes in the equilibrium real exchange rate.2 Reflecting this near-random walk behavior of a floating exchange rate, a change in the spot exchange rate is normally associated with an almost identical change in the forward rate (Svensson 1992, p. 132), signifying that there is a virtually complete lack of any market expectation that the exchange rate will revert toward an equilibrium level within any time horizon relevant to market participants.
Frankel and Rose (1994, p. 35) argue that matters may be even worse than this. They acknowledge that Frankel and Froot (1987) "found that investors tended to react to current appreciations by expecting future depreciations, consistent with either regressive expectations, adaptive expectations, or distributed-lag expectations, at time horizons of one year, six months, or three months". This suggested that expectations appeared to be stabilizing. However, they go on to argue:
Subsequent studies...indicated that investors at shorter horizons of one week to one month tend to extrapolate recent trends... Expectations at these short horizons appear to be destabilizing. Since most trading in the foreign exchange market is known to consist of taking and unwinding positions at horizons measured in hours rather than months or years, these findings have potentially serious implications.

The stylized fact, however, is that a change in the spot rate is normally matched by an equal change in the forward rate under floating. This implies that the net impact of all expectations, long as well as short term, is typically neutral rather than destabilizing.
Many economists have been puzzled by the evidence that the market can disregard long-run fundamentals, for it raises the problem first posed by Milton Friedman (1953) of how profits can be made from speculation that tends to destabilize the market. The most intellectually satisfying answer to this question is that which has been offered by Krugman and Miller (1993), who postulate that, in addition to traders who wish to settle their current account transactions, the market contains speculators who behave like chartists in following the market and stop-loss traders who invest abroad and choose to cover their foreign exchange exposure against abnormally large losses. The way they do this is to place stop-loss orders at a rate that limits the maximum loss they may make. This involves their selling the foreign currency in which they have made their investment when it is extremely weak and buying their home currency when it is strong, which thus creates the possibility for speculators who have collectively driven a currency down to an unrealistically low value to buy that currency from the stop-loss traders at a particularly cheap rate. In effect, the stop-loss traders buy insurance and the speculators provide the insurance and take the profits.
Matters are very different in the presence of an exchange rate band. While bands do not normally have full credibility, and while they sometimes lack any credibility at all, the evidence shows conclusively that when a rate moves within a band the forward rate normally changes by less than the spot rate, indicating that the market expects that the spot rate will tend to revert back toward the centre of the band (Svensson 1992, pp. 132-33). In other words, except where the band has become clearly unrealistic, a band performs the function of crystallizing market expectations of where the equilibrium rate lies, and thus makes expectations stabilizing at the time horizons relevant for influencing market behavior. This is the fundamental reason for preferring a band system rather than allowing the exchange rate to float.
It is sometimes asserted (e.g. by a referee of this paper) that the claim that a band can crystallize market expectations was refuted in Maurice Obstfeld’s well-known paper on international currency experience (1995). This is what Obstfeld said on the topic:
One drawback of target zones is that they may not exert a stabilizing effect unless markets are confident that their edges will be defended successfully. The difficulties in defending rigidly fixed exchange rates, however, apply fully to the edges of target zones, as was illustrated in March 1995 by the Spanish peseta’s crash out of a band much wider than most proponents of target zones advocate. If markets can figure out the fragility of the edges and perform the requisite backward induction, a target zone loses much of its stabilizing power. It may even become destabilizing.

Now it is not true that full credibility is necessary for a target zone to exert a stabilizing effect: it is well established that partial credibility means that the stabilizing impact of the target zone is attenuated, but that it still exists (Krugman 1991; see also the discussion in Williamson 1996a, pp. 8-9). The fact cited above, that a movement of the spot rate within a band is normally accompanied by a smaller movement in the forward rate while there is no such tendency with a floating rate, is conclusive proof that a band typically works as it is meant to in stabilizing market expectations. To counter this well-documented fact we are offered one anecdote, about the Spanish peseta in March 1995. I confess that I have never understood why the Spanish authorities did not make more effort to defend the peseta at that time, any more than I can understand why the Indonesian authorities did not make an effort to defend the rupiah in August 1997 comparable to that made by the Brazilians when faced by a similar attack three months later. But even if the Spanish authorities indeed had no alternative, in the way that Obstfeld implies, it is a sad reflection on the profession’s standards of evidence if one anecdote is deemed to outweigh a well-documented finding such as that which I have cited above.3
Crawling Bands and Monitoring Bands
Given that floating should be regarded as a last resort, to be employed only by a country that cannot see its way to adopting an alternative less subject to what empirical evidence shows to be market whims, what are the alternatives?
The traditional alternative is a fixed exchange rate. One proposition does seem to be widely accepted nowadays: that if one is going to fix the exchange rate, then one should do it properly, by adopting a currency board that will make it (almost) certain that the chosen rate can be defended against market pressure, rather than utilize a half-baked adjustable peg in which the rate is fixed until market pressure knocks the rate off its peg. But the conditions for a fixed exchange rate to be an optimal policy, which have been extensively studied in the optimal currency area literature, are demanding. The conditions under which I would personally recommend a fixed exchange rate are even more demanding, requiring that a country satisfy all four of the following conditions (Williamson 1991):
The economy is small and open, so that it satisfies the conditions for being absorbed in a larger currency areaaccording to the traditional literature on optimum currency areas.
The bulk of its trade is undertaken with the trading partner(s) to whose currency (or whose mutually-peggedcurrencies) it plans to peg.
The country wishes to pursue a macroeconomic policy that will result in an inflation rate consistent with that in the country (or countries) to whose currency (or currencies) it plans to peg.
The country is prepared to adopt institutional arrangements that will assure continued credibility of the fixed rate commitment (which usually implies a currency board).
When those conditions are not all satisfied, then it will be sensible to opt for a system of limited flexibility. The systems that go under this heading include the crawling peg, the wide band, their fusion into target zones4 alias crawling bands, and the latest addition, the "monitoring band". I propose to describe the two leading alternatives under present conditions of high capital mobility, the crawling band and the monitoring band, in detail.
A "crawling band" involves a central bank undertaking a public obligation to maintain its country’s exchange rate within a wide, publicly-announced, band around a parity that is periodically adjusted in relatively small steps in a way intended to keep the band in line with the fundamentals.5 The band width has typically been envisaged as something like +/- 10% around parity, although Chile has recently employed a band of as much as 15% on either side of parity (similar to that adopted by the ERM after the 1993 crisis). The principal cause of changes in the parity—the "crawl"—is typically the inflation differential, to ensure that high domestic inflation does not lead to a progressive erosion in international competitiveness (although this compensation may be less than complete where a country is trying to reduce inflation and prepared to see some loss of competitiveness in the cause of using the exchange rate as a nominal anchor). But countries may also crawl in order to facilitate current account adjustment, allowing a real appreciation following a positive shock (such as an upward revision in the estimate of medium-run capital inflows or the price of an important commodity export) or seeking a real depreciation following a negative shock. The purpose of making parity changes in relatively small steps is to avoid creating situations where the market is able to profit through correct anticipation of an impending parity change.
Table 1: Known Cases of a Crawling Band Exchange Rate Regime


 
Period
Band Width2
Anchor Currency








Chile
1989-present
+ 15%
Basket
Colombia
1991-present
+ 7%
US$
Israel
1991-present
+ 7%
Basket
Indonesia
1997
+ 6%
Basket
(de facto US$)
Ecuador
1995-present
+ 5.5%
US$
Russia
1996-present
+ 15%
US$

1. A crawling band is defined as existing when a) the width of the band is at least + or - 5% and b) the band is adjusted in small steps with a view to keeping it in line with the fundamentals (a requirement that excludes inter alia the ERM and Mexico).
2. Maximum width over period under the crawling band regime. The entry for Ecuador is as of July 1997.
Source: Williamson (1996a), EIU Country Profile Ecuador 1996-97, Indonesia1 997-98 and Russian Federation 1997-98, and IMF Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions 1997.

A crawling band is defended with the same tools that are used to honor any other exchange rate commitment. The first line of defense involves intervention, which is obligatory when the exchange rate hits the edge of the band. Whether or not the intervention is sterilized depends on the judgment of the central bank, which has to decide whether the change in the monetary stance inherent in non-sterilization runs counter to the needs of the domestic economy. For example, a country with an undesired inflow has to decide whether to sterilize this by selling bonds on the open market so as to keep the money supply constant. Even if it decides to sterilize in the first instance, it may be driven to a subsequent change in monetary policy if the exchange market pressures persist. Other tools that may be used to help defend an exchange rate target include capital controls, a market-friendly version of which is the obligatory reserve requirements against short-term foreign loans required in Chile and Colombia. To the extent that the market finds the commitment to defend an exchange rate target convincing, it will itself help to defend the band even before the authorities intervene (Krugman 1991, Miller and Weller 1991).
There is now significant experience with the operation of crawling bands. I have examined how the regime operated in the first three countries to implement it, namely Chile, Colombia, and Israel (Williamson 1996a), where I concluded that it had been quite successful in supporting macroeconomic policy, including in the face of strong capital inflows where a floating rate would undoubtedly have resulted in a serious loss of international competitiveness. All three countries succeeded in reducing inflation, in achieving growth, in maintaining their balance of payments position, and in limiting speculative crises. Since then several other countries have also used the regime, notably Ecuador, Indonesia, and Russia (see Table 1). While Russia appears to have had a favorable experience with the regime, it was, as noted above, abandoned in Indonesia in difficult circumstances in August 1997.
Indonesia’s traumatic experience is worth recounting. The rupiah had been crawling for some time, with the crawl being used to neutralize the trade effect of Indonesia’s relatively high rate of inflation. The central bank began cautiously to widen the exchange rate band in the mid-1990s, and by mid-1997 the band had reached a width of +/- 4 percent. On 2 July 1997 Thailand was forced by speculative pressures to allow the baht to float, when it promptly depreciated by around 15 percent. The rupiah initially remained at the strong edge of its band, and on 11 July the central bank announced that it was widening the band to +/- 6 percent, in what the author took to be a well-judged precautionary move in line with Indonesia’s reputation for exemplary macroeconomic management. Just over a month later, Indonesia was hit by the contagion effect, and the exchange rate went from the strong edge of the band to the weak edge, and indeed slightly beyond it, all in one day. The next day (14 August) the rupiah was floated. The rupiah continued to depreciate in the following days and weeks and months, sometimes by as much as 10 percent in a day with virtually no apparent intervention, driven further downwards by desperate attempts by Indonesian borrowers to buy dollars to cover their external debt obligations. Since many Indonesian corporations had heavy short-term, foreign exchange-denominated borrowings, the depreciation of the rupiah after the move to floating had a catastrophic impact on their solvency. In due course the corporate dollar buying was reinforced by capital flight as ethnic Chinese began to fear a rerun of the troubles of 1966. The currency collapse was the proximate cause of what happened in Indonesia in the following months; had the band been successfully defended, there is no reason to suppose that Indonesia would not have been able to ride out the crisis like Malaysia and the Philippines did, despite the crony capitalism and the weaknesses of the banking and political systems of which we are now so painfully aware.
The case for rejecting floating is based
on the evidence that asset markets in general,
and the foreign exchange markets in particular,
are driven by herd behavior . . .
Two aspects of this sad story are relevant to the debate about the choice of an exchange rate regime. One is that a crawling band was abandoned when it was subjected to strong market pressures. The other is that the depreciation that followed the move to floating was a disaster for the Indonesian economy. Anyone who still believes that floating provides a robust defense against catastrophe (a view to which I must admit to having had some sympathy prior to the Indonesian events being described here) needs to think again. It is perhaps unlikely that a country that has once adjusted to a floating regime would find itself vulnerable to depreciation in the way that Indonesia did: one can surely assume that people do not accept massive unhedged foreign exchange exposure when they have learned that exchange rates are forever gyrating in ways that are essentially random. But, at the very least, an extra degree of circumspection is called for before advising a country that is already in trouble to shift to a floating regime.
Nevertheless, the fact that Indonesia encountered catastrophe as a direct consequence of abandoning the crawling band is not an unambiguous recommendation for the latter, given that its abandonment was due to force majeure. Countries with crawling bands have previously had to accept limited depreciations or appreciations, or widening of the band, in response to strong market pressure, and one may wonder whether the Indonesian authorities did not give in too easily when they abandoned the band so quickly. The Indonesians were holding over $20 billion in foreign exchange reserves at the end of July, of which they used only $0.9 billion in August. But even if one could show that a more spirited defense of the existing band, or of a slightly depreciated or further widened band, could have succeeded, one still has to acknowledge the danger that a crawling band will not always be robust against strong market pressures.
Before concluding that this forces us back into acquiescing in a floating exchange rate, let us consider the alternative regime mentioned in the title of this paper, what the Tarapore Committee named a "monitoring band". The Committee explained its proposal in the following terms:
3.28. On the specific aspect of exchange rate policy, the Committee recommends that the RBI [Reserve Bank of India] should have a Monitoring Exchange Rate Band of +/- 5.0 per cent around the neutral Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER). The RBI should ordinarily intervene as and when the REER is outside the band. The RBI should ordinarily not intervene when the REER is within the band. The RBI could, however, use its judgment to intervene even within the band to obviate speculative forces and unwarranted volatility. The Committee further recommends that the RBI should undertake a periodic review of the neutral REER which could be changed as warranted by the fundamentals.
3.29. The Committee stresses that credibility of the exchange rate policy would be vital in the context of CAC [capital account convertibility] and to this extent there must be transparency in exchange rate policy: (i) the neutral REER, i.e. the base period, should be announced, (ii) the REER Monitoring Band should be declared, (iii) the REER should be published on a weekly basis with the same time lag as the publication of the reserves, and (iv) changes in the neutral REER should be made public.
The key difference between a crawling band and a monitoring band is that the latter does not involve an obligation to defend the edge of the band. The obligation is instead to avoid intervening within the band (except in a tactical way, to prevent unwarranted volatility). There is a presumption that the authorities will normally intervene to discourage the rate straying far from the band, but they have a whole extra degree of flexibility in deciding the tactics that they will employ to achieve this. In particular, if they decide that market pressures are overwhelming, they can choose to allow the rate to take the strain even if this involves the rate going outside the band.6
People sometimes ask whether a monitoring band would amount to anything different to a floating regime. If the authorities choose not to defend the band, is that not floating? Actually, having a monitoring band may make a difference even if the authorities choose not to intervene, so long as the market knows that they can employ policy weapons which they might wield at some future date in seeking to push the rate back within the band, and they know where the band is. This knowledge should make the market fearful of pushing the rate so far as to set up the conditions for a bear squeeze (or a "bull squeeze"). Another possible reason is that the market may believe that the authorities have chosen a correct estimate of the long-run equilibrium rate in their positioning of the band, and this again may discourage the market from pushing the rate as far as it would otherwise go.
Problems of Managing a Band Regime
It is one thing to want to operate a band; it is another actually to make it work. Let us consider first the policy issues involved in operating the more familiar of the two systems, a crawling band.
One first has to decide in terms of what unit to define the band and its parity (i.e. its center, or what the Tarapore Committee called the neutral exchange rate). The most common choice has been to use a major international currency, typically the US dollar, or less commonly the deutschemark (and formerly the pound sterling), for this purpose. This has the advantage of simplicity, but it can also have a severe disadvantage for a country with a diversified trading pattern. Among the crawling band countries, Colombia trades overwhelmingly with the dollar area, and so it pegs to the dollar. But both Chile and Israel have a more diversified pattern of trade, and both peg to baskets.
The countries of East Asia also have highly diversified trade patterns, with Japan being an important import source and export competitor as well as export market, and Europe also being a major trading partner. Despite this, all these countries were more or less pegged to the US dollar in the mid-1990s. When the dollar collapsed in 1995, this meant that their effective exchange rates depreciated and they became hyper-competitive on world markets, sparking an export boom despite the Chinese devaluation of the preceding year. But when the dollar recovered in the summer of 1995 and continued to strengthen thereafter, they suddenly found that their competitive position was eroding, export growth slowed accordingly, and within two years their seemingly impregnable economies had gone into crisis. Given the underlying weaknesses in their banking systems that were exposed by the crisis and the extent to which they had built up short-term international debts, one cannot be sure that they would not have run into crisis even if they had adopted the more rational policy of pegging to a basket of currencies that would have roughly stabilized their effective exchange rates (as suggested by Williamson 1996b).7 But it seems clear that the actual policy of de facto pegging to the dollar was a contributory cause of the East Asian meltdown of 1997.
. . . floating should be regarded as a last resort . . .
The second issue is to determine the value of the parity. Most countries face this issue in the form of deciding whether they should devalue or revalue a parity inherited from the past. Just occasionally, as with Indonesia in 1998 when it toyed with the idea of establishing a currency board, a country may confront the more difficult issue of deciding where to try to stabilize a currency that has been floating. One of the several compelling arguments against the currency board idea being applied in the Indonesian context was the impossibility of being sure that any rate which was not so undervalued as to threaten macro stability would not provoke capital flight. More usually, the question as to whether or not to devalue/revalue requires choosing between the case for a strong exchange rate to help restrain inflation and a weak exchange rate as a mechanism for boosting competitiveness. Minds are often influenced also by the state of the market: it may be that there is now too little willingness to defend a rate that comes under market pressure even if objective analysis suggests that the parity makes more sense than the rate toward which the market is pushing. It is of course crucial to the viability of any band system that changes in the band should be made in small steps rather than large jumps (i.e. that the band should crawl), for otherwise speculators can expect to reap large rewards from correct anticipation of impending parity changes, which makes the market subject to frequent large speculative surges of the character witnessed in the dying days of the Bretton Woods system or of the narrow-band ERM.
What sort of "objective analysis" is available to help form a judgment as to what exchange rate makes sense? One approach is to appeal to PPP, but the disadvantage of this is that it ignores the fact that real shocks can change the equilibrium real exchange rate. My own approach has been to pose the question: what is the (real, effective) exchange rate that would be consistent with macroeconomic balance in the medium term? This I termed the "fundamental equilibrium exchange rate", or FEER (Williamson 1985). A number of economists have now invested significant intellectual resources in attempting to estimate FEERs (see, for example, the essays collected in Williamson 1994, or those in Montiel and Hinkle, forthcoming, or Wren-Lewis and Driver, 1998). No one pretends that this question can be answered with any precision, but most of those who have worked in the area seem to feel that our answers are meaningful within a range of perhaps +/- 10 percent or so.8
That range is important in trying to answer the third question that arises in designing a crawling band system, namely how wide to make the band. The band needs to be quite wide for at least three reasons. The first is because estimates of the FEER are imprecise, and it would be silly to go to great expense to prevent an exchange rate moving toward equilibrium, as could happen if one were trying to defend a narrow band and the estimate of equilibrium were not quite correct. The second is to give scope for cyclical variations in monetary policy: if the home country is in a recession when the rest of the world is in a boom, then it will want to lower its interest rate relative to that in the rest of the world in order to stimulate recovery. A band of +/- 10 percent gives scope (ceteris paribus) for the home country to keep the short-term interest rate 5 percent below the international interest rate for two years without arousing pressures for the rate to go beyond the weak edge of the band, assuming that the market expects the rate to return to parity at the end of that period. The third reason for a wide band is to contain speculative pressures: the wider the band, the greater the possibility of a rebound in the rate and hence the greater the possible cost of an unsuccessful speculative attack, and the less is the possibility that the speculators will catch the authorities in the no-win situation of having to try and defend a disequilibrium exchange rate.
It is not clear whether, or to what extent, these three separate reasons for wanting a wide band require that the band width required to satisfy each of them individually would need to be added together in order to satisfy them jointly. In any event, since none of them yields a quantitative estimate of the desirable band width, one can simply look at what countries have actually done to get a feel for what makes sense. Countries that have operated crawling bands have traditionally used widths in the range of anything up to +/- 10 percent, while in recent years both the ERM (following the crisis of August 1993) and Chile have gone as wide as +/- 15 percent. Critics have often derided such a wide band as no different to floating, but in fact the swings in floating currencies have often been much larger than this. Moreover, the ERM currencies have mostly stayed quite close to the center of the band. Hence, while for years I specified the desirable band width as +/- 10 percent, I now feel that the balance of the evidence suggests something rather wider than this, perhaps as much as +/- 15 percent.
Full specification of a crawling band requires the identification of one other parameter: the rate at which the band will crawl. In the most articulated crawling band systems, such as those in Chile, Colombia, and Israel, this is preannounced for as much as a year into the future, and the band then crawls each day in accord with the formula. Countries that employ crawling bands usually do so mainly because they are experiencing higher inflation than their trading partners, and they doubt whether they could use a fixed exchange rate as a nominal anchor that would promptly stop inflation, so they announce a crawling depreciation calculated to neutralize the trade effects of their expected or actual inflation. If they use expected inflation for this purpose (as in Israel), this is normally a somewhat lower inflation rate than that of the previous year, thus providing a mechanism for coordinating expectations on a gradual deceleration of the inflation rate. If they use actual inflation (as in Chile), then the nominal crawl is only announced for a month in advance, on the basis of the previous month’s inflation (less an allowance for inflation in the country’s trading partners). Chile also makes an allowance for productivity bias, the tendency for the prices of tradable goods to rise relatively slowly in fast-growing countries experiencing catch-up growth. A best-practice formula for the rate of crawl is:
Crawling depreciation equals target domestic inflation minus expected foreign inflation minus estimated productivity bias.
Countries may also need to alter their bands in order to facilitate balance of payments adjustment, if they discover that their previous payments expectations were unrealistic or if they are subjected to real shocks. The sorts of shocks that would cause a need for real depreciation (in conjunction, of course, with an expenditure-reducing policy such as fiscal tightening) are a permanent worsening in the terms of trade, a permanent reduction in capital inflows, an increase in the size of the external debt (relative to GDP) that has to be serviced, or a permanent real depreciation of important competitors in export markets. Import liberalization would also call for real depreciation, but without any need for an associated fiscal tightening. The opposite real shocks would cause a need for real appreciation. Such real exchange rate changes can be introduced by an appropriate modification in the rate of crawl for a limited period of time, or they can be effected by a one-time parity change. Provided that the needed parity change is not large relative to the width of the band, so that the market will not have a motive for seeking to guess whether the authorities are planning to make such a change, the balance of advantage would normally seem to lie with making a one-time change (Williamson 1996a, pp. 112-13).
The objective of choosing a band according to the above principles is to avoid a situation in which the equilibrium exchange rate lies outside the band, which would be prone to motivate speculators to launch a speculative attack in the knowledge that resistance will be too costly to sustain. But even if the equilibrium rate lies within the band, the random nature of much exchange market activity implies that it may prove necessary from time to time to defend the band against market pressure. The commitment implied by announcing a conventional band (as opposed to a monitoring band) is to intervene at the margins to prevent the rate going outside the band. Most countries that operate wide bands also make a practice of intervening within the margins, typically to discourage the rate from approaching the edge of the band. The logic of this is the fear that any shock to confidence when the rate is already close to the edge of the band could easily provoke a speculative run.9
Intervention alone is unlikely to suffice to defend a band against strong market pressure. The next line of defense is usually to change monetary policy, tightening it when the problem is too weak a currency. (The two steps may be combined, by making intervention that is unsterilized.) Another monetary instrument that may prove a useful supplement to sterilized intervention may be a change in the reserve requirements which commercial banks are required to observe. This can be particularly useful where a country is suffering from excessive capital inflows and especially when it has recently liberalized its financial system, because under those circumstances there is a strong risk of a lending boom that lays the seeds of a subsequent banking crisis (Hausmann and Gavin, 1995). An increase in reserve requirements limits the banks’ ability to expand credit on the basis of a given capital inflow and reduces the profitability of their borrowing from abroad, thus simultaneously curbing the capital inflow and reducing the impact of a given inflow on demand. However, it is important not to raise reserve requirements so far as to prompt excessive disintermediation, since the banking system is generally a more efficient intermediary than the alternatives.
Most economists recommend a tightening of fiscal policy as a way of reacting to an excessive pressure of capital inflows, on the argument that this dampens demand and thus permits lower interest rates which in turn discourages the inflow. Some object that the improved fiscal policy may instead act as a magnet and magnify the inflow, although my own assessment is that a further effect of this type is unlikely once a country has placed itself indisputably among the ranks of the solvent. Others argue that it is paradoxical to react to a foreign desire to make more resources available to the country by actually cutting the demand generated by the public sector. (One can understand the average politician reacting with incredulity when told that it is his duty to raise taxes or cut expenditures because foreigners want to lend his country so much!) Hence it would be a mistake to regard fiscal policy as a panacea, although it may be able to play a useful supporting role.
These techniques may suffice to handle relatively short surges in capital inflows or outflows, but their power is limited when the root cause of the problem is a permanent capital flow markedly larger than the government believes it to be prudent to accept, either because of a fear of Dutch disease or because of the danger of an excessive buildup of foreign debt. This is the really difficult case to handle, and the one that best justifies an attempt to limit the magnitude of capital inflows by some type of capital controls. The most successful such controls in recent years seem to have been the obligation to hold unremunerated reserves against foreign loans at the central bank, a technique that has been exploited by both Chile and Colombia. But even in this case there is a debate as to whether the controls have done much to limit the size of the total inflow (they have certainly extended the maturity of the foreign debt, which is worth doing in itself, as has been graphically illustrated by the flight of short-term foreign loans during the East Asian crisis).
. . . an extra degree of circumspection is
called for before advising a country that is already
in trouble to shift to a floating regime.
It is far-fetched to suppose, as has sometimes been argued, that these rather marginal capital controls are the main reason for the success of the crawling band. Countries with far more Draconian capital controls than these were regularly forced to change or abandon their exchange-rate pegs under the adjustable peg. What these reserve requirements do seem capable of doing is to limit the build-up of short-term foreign debt that can make a country vulnerable to a foreign exchange crisis even without much exchange rate misalignment, as seen in East Asia in 1997; but to imagine that they could fend off a crisis when a misalignment has developed is pie-in-the-sky. It is even more difficult to imagine that a Tobin tax (which is a two-way tax of a few basis points on foreign exchange transactions, in contrast to the implicit one-way tax of as much as 300 basis points on the stock of short-term foreign inflows employed in Chile and Colombia) would make epsilon’s worth of difference in stemming a speculative run in which the potential gains are perceived as hundreds or thousands of basis points.
While a combination of all the policy instruments listed above seems to provide a reasonably effective way of maintaining exchange rates within a band under most circumstances, provided of course that the band is not misaligned with respect to the fundamentals, none of the individual policy weapons is overwhelmingly effective and experience has shown that there are conditions under which they may not be able to hold the line. In most cases the reaction of a government that finds that it cannot defend the band has been to undertake a realignment or to widen the margins. Provided that such incidents are isolated and the changes are fairly small, so that the gains of the speculators are of limited size, this does not appear to destroy the viability of the system: in effect the market is allowed a contributory role in helping to determine the position of the band, but the government still plays the strategic role in thinking about where the exchange rate needs to be in the long term if macro equilibrium is to be served that is so lacking in a system of floating.
But we now have the evidence of Indonesia (and earlier of Spain) that exogenous shocks can be greater than the authorities feel comfortable handling with such marginal adjustments. Defending the band was perceived to involve too costly a conflict with other policy objectives. And it is possible to think of other contexts in which the same would be true: for example, a recent study of Wren-Lewis and Driver (1998) estimates that the yen/dollar FEER is under 100 yen to the dollar, as against a current market exchange rate of over 130 yen to the dollar. Even after allowing for the likely effect of an announced band in discouraging large movements away from parity, one can hardly be sanguine that the market exchange rate could be pushed within a band around such a parity without prohibitive costs in terms of either stifling the possibilities of Japanese recovery or igniting inflation in the United States. Clearly no one wishes to pay a price like that for achieving an exchange rate in line with the long-run fundamentals.
A monitoring band, or a crawling band with soft margins, represents an attempt to continue having some impact on the exchange rate without obliging the authorities to give it priority over other objectives. It is worth asking whether such a regime might have been capable of heading off the crisis that hit Indonesia in August 1997. The central bank would have allowed the rate to go outside the band under extreme market pressure, but it would have announced that it planned to take every opportunity to push the rate back within the band as and when circumstances permitted. When it announced that it was going to the IMF, the intention would have been to replenish the ammunition that it could use in seeking to push the rate back within the band. The key question is whether such an announcement would have avoided the scramble for foreign exchange to establish cover for uncovered debts that was the proximate cause of the plunge of the rupiah.
Even if one regards that as doubtful, it might be possible to supplement a band that was blessed as appropriate by the IMF with measures on the debt front that would make such an announcement credible. Specifically, there is now a great deal of concern about the moral hazard that tempts international banks to extend short-term loans without giving too much thought as to whether the debtors will be able to service their obligations under adverse circumstances, secure in the knowledge that an IMF bailout will enable them to recover their loans if the worst comes to the worst. One possible approach to this problem would be for the IMF to have the right to approve a temporary suspension (or a permanent restructuring) of short-term debt-service payments by a country that was at or beyond the weak edge of a wide band that was agreed by the IMF to be appropriate to the country’s situation and that the authorities were defending with an approved degree of vigor.
The idea of a monitoring band is to make such soft margins the rule rather than the exception. Intervention would normally not take place at all within the band, except perhaps for smoothing purposes to curb short-term volatility. Only when the rate breached the limits of the band would the central bank start to intervene, and the other sorts of measures discussed above start to be deployed, with a view to limiting further deviations. The advantage of this is that it would avoid drawing a sharp line in the sand, whose breach gives a signal to the market that policy has failed and that all bets are now off. The rush to buy foreign exchange cover that precipitated the Indonesian collapse might have been averted had there been a market expectation that further depreciation would encounter steadily growing resistance, instead of a sudden realization that the band had gone and that unlimited depreciation was now a possibility.
Most of the earlier analysis about how to manage a crawling band remains valid for a monitoring band as well. Specifically, one would have to go through exactly the same analysis in choosing a unit to which to peg, in choosing the value of the parity, and in deciding how to crawl. The two differences concern the width of the band and the question of how to defend the band. So far as the width is concerned, it would surely be appropriate to select a narrower band, since the obligation is only to start intervening in a systematic way once the margin has been crossed. A figure of +/- 5 percent, as suggested by the Tarapore Committee, seems perfectly reasonable.
The key question that needs to be asked is whether a monitoring band would have the same positive role in focusing market expectations on where the equilibrium rate lies that a crawling band has been shown to have. Since we have no experience of the operation of a monitoring band, it is impossible to give an empirically-based answer to that question. All one can say is that it seems a reasonable presumption.
Conclusions
I have laid out above the case for employing a band system to manage the exchange rate, in preference to floating. It rests on the extremely weak links between the market exchange rate and the "fundamentals" of economic theory under a regime of floating, and the presumption that a government that thinks about those links can expect to do better than the market does. This is not to deny that there have been many historical instances when misguided government policies of sticking to a fixed exchange rate that has been outdated because of relative inflation or real shocks have led to misalignments of the same order of magnitude as those that have occurred under floating exchange rates. The point is rather that markets can nowadays, with the high degree of capital mobility that prevails in the world, be relied upon to discipline similar foolishness. The authorities think about where the rate needs to be from the standpoint of the macro fundamentals, and the market is then guided by that judgment as long as it finds it plausible while being free to challenge it when it concludes that the authorities have got it wrong—but even then the market knows that what it needs to think about is whether the authorities have misjudged the fundamentals, and not what other market operators are going to be thinking in the next ten minutes. A system of crawling bands relies on constructive interactions between the market and the authorities, it does not pretend that all the wisdom lies with one or the other.
The paper has only briefly touched on the reasons for preferring a system of crawling (or monitoring) bands to a fixed exchange rate. I regard this as preferable for most large countries because it gives them an extra degree of freedom in policy making, which is specially valuable when confronted by a need for balance of payments adjustment as a result of an asymmetrical shock. But there are also cases, especially relevant for many small countries, where a fixed exchange rate may be a better option, as analyzed in the literature on optimal currency areas. The main thing we have learned in recent years is that if a country intends to pursue a fixed exchange rate policy, then it ought to do it properly by employing a currency board. So the debate on exchange rate policy ought not to concern fixed versus floating rates, but rather currency boards versus crawling bands.
References
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Kenneth Froot (1986), "Understanding the US Dollar in the Eighties: The Expectations of Fundamentalists and Chartists", Economic Record, 24-38.
_____ (1987), "Short-Term and Long-Term Expectations of the Yen/Dollar Exchange Rate: Evidence from Survey Data", Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 1, 249-74.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew K. Rose (1994), "A Survey of Empirical Research on Nominal Exchange Rates", NBER Working Papers no. 4865.
Friedman, Milton (1953), "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates", in Essays in Positive Economics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Hausmann, Ricardo, and Michael Gavin (1995), "The Roots of Banking Crises: The Macroeconomic Context", paper presented to the conference on Banking Crises in Latin America organized by the IDB and the Group of 30, 6-7 October, Washington.
Krugman, Paul (1985), "Is the Strong Dollar Sustainable?", in The U.S. Dollar -- Recent Developments, Outlook and Policy Options, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 103-33.
_____ (1991), "Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, no.3, August, 669-82.
Krugman, Paul, and Marcus Miller (1993), "Why Have A Target Zone?", NBER Discussion Paper no.718.
Marris, Stephen. 1985. Deficits and the Dollar: The World Economy at Risk. Washington: Institute for International Economics.
McKinnon, Ronald I. (1979), Money in International Exchange (New York: Oxford University Press, 1979).
Miller, Marcus, and Paul Weller (1991), "Exchange Rate Bands with Price Inertia", Economic Journal, Nov. 1991.
Montiel, Peter, and Lawrence Hinkle., ed. (forthcoming) Estimating Equilibrium Exchange Rates in Developing Countries. Washington: World Bank.
Obstfeld, Maurice (1995), "International Currency Experience: New Lessons and Lessons Relearned", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.
Rogoff, Kenneth (1996), "The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle", Journal Of Economic Literature 34 (June): 647-68.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (1992), "An Interpretation of Recent Research on Exchange Rate Target Zones", Journal of Economic Perspectives 6, no.4 (Fall), 119-44.
Tarapore Committee (1997), Report of the Committee on Capital Account Convertibility, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai.
Williamson, John (1985), The Exchange Rate System (Washington: Institute for International Economics).
_____ (1991), "Advice on the Choice of an Exchange Rate Policy", in E.M. Claassen, ed., Exchange Rate Policies in Developing and Post-Socialist Countries (San Francisco: ICS Press for the International Center for Economic Growth).
_____(1994), Estimating Equilibrium Exchange Rates (Washington: Institute for International Economics).
_____(1996a), The Crawling Band as an Exchange Rate Regime: Lessons from Chile, Colombia, and Israel (Washington: Institute for International Economics).
_____(1996b), "The Case for a Common Basket Peg", forthcoming in Exchange Rate Policies In Emerging Asian Countries (Conference held in Seoul on 14-15 November 1996).
Wren-Lewis, Simon, and Rebecca L. Driver (1998), Real Exchange Rates for the Year 2000 (Washington: Institute for International Economics).
Notes
1. The author acknowledges helpful comments by Marcus Miller and Adam Posen, stimulating comments by a referee, and research assistance by Molly Mahar. Opinions expressed are those of the author and cannot be construed as positions of the World Bank.
2. The studies that have found evidence that exchange rates revert to relative PPP in the long run have not searched for changes in the equilibrium real exchange rate.
3. Incidentally, Obstfeld also betrays his lack of understanding of the literature on limited exchange rate flexibility in arguing that the difficulty of defending a rigidly fixed exchange rate applies fully to the edge of a target zone. Selling a currency that may depreciate when its exchange rate is rigidly fixed is to buy a one-way option, since one can be quite sure that the currency under attack will not be revalued even if the speculative attack is successfully fended off. In contrast, a currency with a wide band may well appreciate within the band if the attack fails, implying that joining in a such an attack involves an element of risk. This makes defence of the band easier.
4. The term “target zone” was first used by Robert Roosa, and subsequently by other authors including myself, to mean a system which combined both flexibility in the parity and a wide band. But it was then preempted by Paul Krugman to mean simply a system with a wide band, so rather than have the same name applied to two different regimes, we adopted Jacob Frenkel’s term “crawling band” to signify the regime that combined both features.
5. Note that some countries that have employed a wide band, such as Mexico in the years leading up to the 1994 crisis, did not satisfy this latter condition. That is, Mexico tried to use its exchange rate as a nominal anchor rather than making it an important policy objective to keep the exchange rate competitive. This resulted in the overvaluation that was the root cause of the crisis.
6. Those interested in the intellectual history of proposals for limited exchange rate flexibility may care to note two antecedents of the monitoring band. The first is the “reference rate proposal” of Ethier and Bloomfield (1975), which essentially proposed a monitoring band of zero width around an announced reference rate that would constrain intervention—a central bank could intervene only to push the exchange rate toward its reference rate, but it was not obliged to intervene if it did not wish to do so. The second is the “soft margins” that accompanied my original proposal for “target zones” (Williamson 1985), which would have allowed the authorities to let the rate move outside the target zone if they deemed market pressures too strong to resist without unacceptable cost to other objectives of economic policy.
7. I also suggested that the basket to which they pegged should be a common one, so as to avoid arbitrary and unwanted movements in their mutual competitiveness as a result of variations in the exchange rates between third currencies.
8. The most difficult issue that arises in estimating FEERs is interpreting what should be meant by the external dimension of macroeconomic equilibrium. The question is what sort of current account balance to identify with equilibrium: clearly this must be a balance that will be sustainable in the medium run, but that is normally too weak a criterion to yield a unique figure. One may select the value that is consistent with the government’s medium-term fiscal intentions, or the value of the trend capital in(out)flow, or one may use some criterion of optimality; normally these approaches give much the same answer, but none of them seems completely satisfactory under all circumstances. The issue remains a contentious one.
9. The Krugman target zone model predicts that the exchange rate will spend most of its time close to the edge of the band. This prediction has been decisively rejected by empirical evidence. The practice of intra-marginal intervention may explain why the model fails.

Reform of the financial and corporate sectors is a central element in Korea’s effort to recover from its economic crisis. This summary of a forthcoming study by Institute senior fellow Edward M. Graham suggests how such reform might be accomplished. Dr. Graham is author or coauthor of Global Competition Policy (1997) and Competition Policies for a Global Economy (1997) with J. David Richardson, Global Corporations and National Governments (1996), and Foreign Direct Investment in the United States with Paul Krugman (3rd edition 1995). © Institute for International Economics. All rights reserved.
Efforts to restructure the South Korean economy via financial sector reform and privately engineered “big deals” among the chaebol, the large conglomerate firms that dominate the South Korean economy, have not yet delivered the desired result of restoring the economy to health. South Korea should consider more radical approaches. One successful model that might be followed is that of the Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC). This was a state-owned enterprise created to resolve the crisis in the United States created in the late 1980s by the failure of significant numbers of savings and loan associations (S&Ls). S&Ls were a type of bank created to take long-term savings deposits from households and relend these mostly as residential mortgages. These banks, during the 1980s, were deregulated so as to allow them to hold more diverse assets and to remove interest rate ceilings that had been imposed during earlier times. As a result, many of them restructured their asset portfolios away from low return (but low risk) mortgages to higher return (but higher risk) assets such as so-called “junk bonds.”
Implicit in this asset switching was an element of moral hazard. This arose because most of the liabilities of the S&Ls—i.e., the savings deposits of households—were insured by the US federal government through the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC), a subsidiary of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Thus, in the event that the high-risk assets were to drop so much in value that the S&Ls became financially insolvent, the liabilities were guaranteed by the US government.
Better bank regulation and supervision
are, of course, key issues that South
Korea now faces.

During the late 1980s, this is exactly what happened: Numerous S&Ls became insolvent, and their liabilities became those of the US government. Among other things, this event called into question the wisdom of the extent of deregulation of these banks. One lesson, in retrospect, was that the banking sector cannot be fully deregulated. Banks must be subject both to fiduciary regulation to limit the riskiness of their investments and to effective supervision. Better bank regulation and supervision are, of course, key issues that South Korea now faces.
But by the late 1980s, the damage from this deregulation had been done. Thus, the immediate issue was how to resolve the crisis resulting from insolvent S&Ls. To achieve this resolution, the RTC was created on August 9, 1989, as a public company that would, upon completion of its task, go out of business. And, indeed, the RTC was closed at the end of 1995, one year ahead of schedule, with its task largely and successfully completed.
During the years of its existence, the RTC acted as receiver of the assets of failed S&Ls, most of which were sold or liquidated. The depositors of liquidated institutions received, in most cases, full value of their deposits under their FSLIC coverage. The assets of the institutions in turn were auctioned. Because the S&Ls were insolvent, by definition the values of their assets were less than that of their liabilities, and hence the RTC operated at a loss. The goal was to minimize this loss while disrupting as little as possible the normal functioning of financial markets.
By most accounts, this goal was met. The RTC resolved a total of 747 failed financial institutions. The book value of the assets of these institutions was $458 billion, and the RTC was able to sell 98 percent of these assets, for which it received $397 billion. (The figures include recoveries both from sale of certain failed institutions and liquidation of others.) Thus, a gross capital loss of about $61 billion was recorded. In addition, the RTC incurred administrative expenses. But it also realized revenues not associated with sales of assets. The bottom line was that the total costs of the RTC to the US taxpayer were $81.9 billion, or slightly more than 1 percent of 1995 GDP.1
It should be noted that much of the operating expense of the RTC resulted from the use of private contractors to manage and liquidate assets of failed S&Ls. The comptroller general of the United States reported in June 1996 that the RTC's controls over contractors, especially in the first several years of RTC operations, were lax and that recovery of assets sold might have been adversely affected by this laxity. One lesson is that, while use of contractors is desirable, adequate supervision and control of these contractors must be maintained.
If South Korea were to adopt the RTC model, there should be a number of changes with respect to what was done in the United States. For example, if a South Korean RTC were to operate under strictly the same rules as in the United States, then because of the magnitude of the nonperforming loan problem in South Korean banks, virtually all banks in South Korea would have to be sold or liquidated—but this clearly is not an option. Thus, the South Korean RTC would seek to allow a certain number of banks to survive. But the South Korean RTC should also seek to ensure that surviving banks were to change thoroughly their lending practices. To do so, the South Korean RTC would almost surely have to assume managerial control of these banks and, as explained below, to take some of the bad loans off their books.
In this regard, it is worth noting that, in the United States, the RTC also actually took control of failed financial institutions. And, even in the market-oriented United States, under a market-oriented Republican administration, there were few complaints about “undue government interference in the market” when this happened. Rather, it was recognized that a major crisis existed and that strong government action was needed. But, as already noted, the RTC existed only as a temporary institution to solve a crisis. The idea from the beginning was for the government, through the RTC, to act decisively as manager of failed financial institutions but, once the crisis was resolved, to withdraw from this role.
. . . the banking sector
cannot be fully deregulated.

Likewise, in South Korea, one would expect the time during which the South Korean RTC actually controlled the banks would be limited. During this time, the South Korean RTC would, however, completely overhaul the ways in which banks did business. Key to the success of this effort would be massive training efforts to educate bank managers in techniques of credit analysis, risk management, and other aspects of financial management. Thus, the South Korean RTC might, among other things, serve as a management training institution (or as a sponsoring agent to send bank managers to management development courses in educational institutions such as graduate business schools). Beyond this, it would supervise effective implementation of the new techniques that were being taught.
To fulfill this role, the South Korean RTC, as did its US counterpart, would have to hire a competent, full-time staff. One issue would be what to do with this staff once the South Korean RTC ceased operations. An answer would be that this staff would largely consist of highly trained and experienced young financial managers who, after fulfilling their term of office at the South Korean RTC, would have received “on-the-job” training needed to staff the reformed banks of South Korea.
Beyond this, there are some other ways in which the South Korean approach should be quite different from the US one. One possibility would be for the South Korean government to issue bonds and to exchange these, at face value, for the nonperforming loans of bankrupt South Korean banks whose operations were taken over by the South Korean RTC. The stock of government bonds as a percent of total outstanding debt instruments in South Korea is quite low relative to other advanced nations, and creation of these bonds as tradable instruments would be in South Korea's interests under any circumstances as a means to developing a deeper bond market. Such a market is a necessary component of a well-functioning capital market. A deep bond market is also an essential element for the proper functioning of an independent central bank's open market operations to control the rate of expansion of the domestic money supply. This is of importance to South Korea because one of its recent reforms has been to create an independent central bank by removing the Bank of Korea from the control of the Finance and Economics Ministry.
Such a swap of bonds for nonperforming loans would be a particularly effective way by which to recapitalize the banks. But it would present the following dilemma: Because nonperforming assets would be replaced by performing assets, there would be a windfall gain to shareholders of the banks at public expense. The reasonable resolution of this dilemma would be for nonperforming assets to be written down to market value prior to the swap and, then, for the South Korean government to be granted equity in the banks of value equal to the markdown. The holder of record of the equity would logically be the South Korean RTC. But, because South Korea seeks that banks be private and not state-owned institutions, the South Korean government should then reprivatize its holdings in the banks by selling these to the public.
The swaps would also leave the South Korean government as the holder of a large amount of bad debt. The next logical step would be a mandatory equity for debt exchange at rates to be determined via independent valuation of the underlying securities. The equity in the chaebol and other South Korean firms that would now be held by the South Korean government then likewise should be sold to the public via the South Korean RTC. The result would be recapitalization of business firms via debt to equity swaps, with the new equity held by the South Korean public.
Thus, the South Korean RTC would serve as a means to privatize public holdings of debt and equity that resulted from recapitalization of the banking system. In doing so, the South Korean RTC would doubtlessly achieve another desirable goal, a broadening of the ownership of South Korea's large financial and industrial enterprises. Indeed, one question that is posed by the process of privatization is, exactly who will buy the assets that are privatized? Because South Korea has a very high rate of household savings, the answer could very well be that the ultimate buyers would be ordinary South Koreans. But, to achieve this, it would be desirable that there be created intermediate institutions such as professionally managed mutual and pension funds. And, thus, one final task of a South Korean RTC might be to help foster the creation of these institutions that now largely are lacking in South Korea but that are important components of a deep financial market.
One implication of this would be that the losses stemming from nonperforming loans would ultimately be borne to as great an extent as possible by the holders of existing equity in indebted enterprises. The losses would be manifested in dilution of this equity as the result of public sale of new equity created by the equity for debt swaps. The operations of the South Korean RTC thus would not have the effect of forcing the taxpaying public to absorb the losses properly accruing to owners of businesses that used debt to make bad investment decisions.2 Rather, the operations of the South Korean RTC would force an equitable outcome of bad debt resolution.
A South Korean RTC could solve
many of Korea's problems,
including providing a vehicle by which the
human resources of Korea could be
put to work to rebuild the economy.

All of this suggests a set of very daunting tasks for a South Korean RTC. But South Korea does not lack for well-educated, talented persons who would be quite capable of carrying out these tasks. The issue is one of organizing these persons in a way to enable the crisis to be solved. A South Korean RTC could solve many of South Korea's problems, including providing a vehicle by which the human resources of South Korea could be put to work to rebuild the economy.
Notes
1. However, it should be noted that the costs of the RTC were not the only costs associated with the resolution of the S&L crisis. In addition, the costs of deposit insurance (not handled by RTC) were $64.7 billion directly and $7.5 billion indirectly. Partially offsetting these, $22 billion were reinsured in the private sector, so that taxpayer costs of this insurance were $50.2 billion. In total, the costs to the US economy of the S&L crisis were $160.1 billion, of which $132.1 billion was borne by US taxpayers and $28.0 billion was borne by the private sector. These figures include both the costs of the RTC and the FDIC. The $160.1 billion was about 2.2 percent of 1995 GDP, but the costs were spread out over the life of the RTC of slightly more than five years.
2. Or, at least this would be true if the residual value of equity (the current value of equity minus the nominal value of bad debt) were positive. If this value were negative, the South Korean RTC would be forced to absorb the difference between the payment of the bad debt and the revenue achieved via sale of the firm.

Adam Posen, senior fellow, summarizes the main conclusions and recommendations of his Restoring Japan’s Economic Growth, published by the Institute in September 1998, and assesses the subsequent initiatives of the Japanese government.
As ever in Japanese economic policy, the reality is in the implementation. The banking reform bills passed by the Japanese Diet in mid-October and the fiscal stimulus package contained in the FY1999 budget proposed by the Obuchi government address the two major barriers to a restoration of confidence in Japan: financial fragility and lack of domestic demand. Combined with the Bank of Japan's efforts already underway to stop deflation, these initiatives could bring about a sustained recovery in Japan (and provide a floor under developments in the rest of Asia)—if they are properly carried out.1
The legislative program is in itself a healthy correction of an ongoing mistake in Japanese policy—resigned acceptance of economic stagnation. From 1992 to the present, the Japanese government claimed to be undertaking significant public investment and stimulus packages while consciously spending only one-third of the amount commonly estimated. In the midst of the 1990s recession, Japanese fiscal policy was, in fact, often contractionary because of misplaced budgetary priorities. Cleanup of the banking sector was repeatedly postponed, first with claims that the problems were small and would fix themselves and then with fears that the problems were too large to be tackled without making matters worse.
In the midst of the 1990s recession,
Japanese fiscal policy was, in fact, often contractionary
because of misplaced budgetary priorities.
On both fronts, however, poor economic performance was always the result of policy choice. A rapid return to the growth of which Japan remains capable was, and still is, attainable through responsible policies. As I argued in Restoring Japan's Economic Growth, sizable fiscal stimulus in the form of permanent tax cuts, financial cleanup through sorting out banks on the basis of solvency, and monetary expansion anchored by an announced positive inflation target would constitute such a program. Now that the Japanese government will have a legislative mandate to engage in that type of fiscal expansion and banking reform, the how-tos for successfully implementing that mandate should be set out.2
How to Expand Fiscal Policy
When true fiscal stimulus was undertaken in Japan, as occurred in September 1995 when a 1.6 percent of GDP public investment program was combined with a temporary consumption tax cut equivalent to 1.2 percent of GDP, substantial economic growth of 3.9 percent ensued in the following year. When consumption taxes were raised from 3 percent back up to 5 percent in April 1997, and public investment was cut in 1996 and 1997, the economy contracted. The folly of this stop-go policy has been compounded by the small size of all prior stimulus packages, except that of September 1995.
Size matters for fiscal policy because, unless an economy is stimulated above its rate of potential growth, unemployment will continue to rise and capacity utilization will continue to drop. Confidence, and with it consumption and investment, will erode further. For this reason, a small fiscal stimulus package may be a waste of money, whereas a sufficiently large fiscal package will lead to sustained growth. The Obuchi government is thus correct to think in terms of passing a stimulus program larger than a minimum threshold in order to have the visible impact necessary to restore confidence.
How much is large enough? Fiscal stimulus of 4 percent of GDP (20 trillion yen) is the number to shoot for. Japan's potential rate of growth remains at least 2 percent a year. Given an expected contraction in the Japanese economy of 1.5-2.0 percent of GDP in 1998 and the need for fiscal stimulus to make up the difference between that and potential, the content of the package should be about as great as the sum of those two numbers.
There will be a multiplier effect on fiscal expansion greater than one, as there clearly was for the September 1995 package. At least initially, however, the multiplier will be lower than usual, given the current lack of confidence and the banks' weakness, which is the reason for stimulus to almost equal the output gap in size. There is no reason not to err on the side of too much stimulus, because the Japanese economy is hardly in danger of overheating.
A temporarily dampened multiplier on fiscal policy should not lead to misplaced fears that a large tax cut would be saved rather than spent, offsetting the stimulus. There has never been an instance anywhere of a large, credibly lasting, tax cut that did not filter out into the real economy, not in the United States in the 1970s (before deregulation and improvements in productivity growth), not even in prereform Latin American economies in the 1980s—economies which had financial or confidence problems arguably worse than today's Japan.
This consistency of response makes economic sense because, by transferring present and future income out of the government's hands and into the private sector's, there is an increase in wealth and a decrease in uncertainty for individuals. Both of these stimulate spending no matter what those individuals' beliefs are about the state of the economy. In addition, the evidence from Japan and elsewhere is clear that a primary determinant of short-run savings behavior is recent economic growth in the savers' country, which means that as fiscal expansion improves growth, spending is encouraged and investment is crowded in.3
Fiscal stimulus of 4 percent of GDP
(20 trillion yen) is the number
to shoot for.
It is true that interest rates on Japanese government bonds have risen in recent weeks in response to the stimulus announcements. Some perspective must be maintained on the limited importance of this development. Japanese interest rates still could hardly be lower and even in real terms remain lower than almost any government has paid to borrow this century. The idea that the world's largest creditor nation—with the lowest net public debt in the G-7, absolutely no government debt issued in foreign currency and essentially no debt (less than 1 percent of GDP) held by foreign creditors—will become a default or even an inflation risk is patently absurd. The few percent of GDP in additional debt issued to support appropriate fiscal stimulus today will make no difference to the aging Japanese society's social security burdens tomorrow.4
The proposed FY1999 budget comes close to, but is still short, of the ideal number, containing about 15 trillion yen (or 3 percent of GDP) in actual stimulative content, once the usual deductions for previously promised spending and for irrelevant programs is made. It is in the form of the stimulus, however, that there remains significant room for improvement. As proposed, half of the stimulus will come through new public spending and half will consist of personal and business income tax cuts for FY1999.
The entire fiscal stimulus in Japan should instead take the form of permanent tax cuts. Any form of tax cut is better than the wasteful public works spending repeatedly undertaken in Japan. In general, permanent tax cuts reduce distortions in the economy, induce future cuts in public spending (as the Reagan deficits did in the United States), and provide a clear signal of commitment from the government. With tax cuts, unlike public spending, there is no way for bureaucratic resistance or implementation delays to impede the full disbursement of the money—factors of indisputable importance to the failure of Japanese stimulus packages in the 1990s.
The type of tax cut is less important than its size (and that it is not public works). There is clear reason, however, to prefer tax cuts that are permanent and that are structurally neutral if not positive. Permanent tax cuts, which are taken into account in multiyear planning, are more likely than temporary cuts to be spent and to reduce uncertainty.
Income tax cuts or housing tax cuts (combined with appropriate deregulation5 ) would be best because they would remove gross inefficiencies and inequities while stimulating. At present, only 50 percent of Japanese households pay income tax, and there is enormous pent-up demand for housing in Japan. Such cuts would go directly to those Japanese households whose increased discretionary saving is the source of the downturn. Meanwhile, consumption taxes cannot credibly remain low for an extended period because they are the most efficient way to collect taxes, especially in an aging society.
The goal of any expansionary fiscal policy should be sustained growth. Not even fervent advocates of fiscal stimulus for Japan believe that government support for aggregate demand could or should continue indefinitely. This is precisely why the new fiscal stimulus must be sufficiently visible, sizable, and rapid so as to improve private-sector expectations and induce a sustained upswing in private-sector demand. Further credibility gaps between stated expansionary intent and actual impact will impose a heavy cost—an exact repeat of the 1996 cycle of temporary stimulus, uncertain expansion, and then fiscal contraction could be devastating to confidence.
How to Solve the Credit Crunch
The Japanese government's statements greeting the first few private banks' acceptance of public capital made it seem that the plan to recapitalize Japan's banks would be far less conditional than desirable. The events of recent weeks, especially the commendably expeditious closure of Nippon Credit Bank by the Financial Supervision Agency, demonstrate that proper implementation of financial cleanup may in fact be underway. As I predicted when the financial reform bills first passed the Diet in October, the cleanup appears ready to succeed despite widespread political intent to maintain business as usual.6
This prospect for success arises because the pressures on the Japanese banking system from both international markets and Japanese savers have increased and changed in severity in recent months. Savers are increasingly looking for alternatives to domestic Japanese banks and finding them in insurance companies, postal savings, foreign banks, and even cash; foreign banks have moved from charging Japanese banks a premium to do business, to refusing to act as counterparties with those banks. As a result, there is increased incentive for the better or too-big-to-fail Japanese banks to differentiate themselves from their weaker brethren and decreased ability of the weaker Japanese banks to withstand the market discipline.
This healthy separation does not make a successful cleanup inevitable. Concerted efforts by Japanese politicians to maintain some form of convoy system could derail the process. Though some members of the government may genuinely believe that widespread and unconditional injection of public capital is necessary, they are mistaken that capital alone will ease the credit crunch without additional reform efforts. In fact, only a credible bank reform program—including forced bank closures, management replacement, bad loan selloffs, and improved disclosure and supervision—will restore credit flows while minimizing disruption.
Any form of tax cut is better
than the wasteful public works spending
repeatedly undertaken in Japan.
Repeated invocation of the “hard landing” scenario has promoted the myth that, if Japan were to truly clean up its financial sector problems, the credit crunch would radically deepen. The reality is different. Japan is not the first economy of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) to have a banking crisis and asset price decline—in fact, almost every industrial democracy experienced something similar in the last 12 years. While none of their financial problems were allowed to grow and fester to the extent that Japan's was, we did learn some basic lessons that apply to Japan as well.
First, although no one should expect to clean up a country's banking problems overnight, or even over a couple of years, you limit the cleanup's ongoing drag if you put a transparent process in place for deciding which banks to close and how to dispose of bad loans. It is not as though one day the Japanese government announces "there is 75 trillion yen in bad loans, and 125 million Japanese citizens, so each of you will write a check for 600,000 yen." The public gets to spread out the cost over several years, and the ultimate bill meaningfully shrinks from the initial estimate of bad loans, because as the economy improves, some money is received for bad loans sold off, and banks make better loans with improved incentives. This only works, however, with a process justifying the conviction that supervision is decent for new loans, that banks getting public capital are truly solvent, and that a liquid market for distressed assets like real estate is created.
Second, cleaning up a financial mess in the right way is not entirely contractionary for an economy. There are compensating effects that expand credit as well. Although forcing banks to meet capital standards, and closing some banks, will contract credit, the removal of uncertainty about the system as a whole will allow surviving banks to borrow more easily on interbank markets, will encourage good borrowers with low risks to come back into the credit market, and will improve the ability of banks to sort out bad from good lending opportunities. It also encourages individual savers to put more of their money back into the private banks, thereby reducing the cost of funds and the uncertainty of cash flows for those banks, further improving the flow of credit.
. . . cleaning up a financial mess in the
right way is not entirely
contractionary for an economy.
These two points taken together mean the contractionary effect of proper financial cleanup should not be thought of as imposing a "100 trillion yen hit", or anything close to that number, on the Japanese economy all at once. Improper or partial financial cleanup ignores both lessons—it simply spends public money that will eventually add to the bill due, and it foregoes the expansionary effects of reform by leaving market uncertainty undiminished.
That is why the financial cleanup must be carried through in line with the market pressures for a differentiation among Japanese banks. A lenient public capital injection alone will be ineffective in alleviating the Japanese credit crunch. Neither Japanese depositors nor Japanese banks' counterparties in financial markets will believe that the public money is being well spent rather than gambled on high-risk loans or paid out to shareholders. Neither will be able to verify whether banks truly are solvent. The pointlessness of less-than-credible claims of solvency can be seen in the rising pressures upon the Japanese financial system in the last year despite repeated statements that its banks (including the now nationalized LTCB) already met the Basle Capital Adequacy standards.
Without proper cleanup, the ongoing distrust by depositors and interbank lenders will deprive the Japanese banks of liquidity, and that part of the new capital that is not squandered will be inevitably eroded. Even in the initial period before the capital disappears again, good and new borrowers will be unable to arrange loans in an environment where their potential collateral is constrained by the lack of disposal of assets underlying bad loans. Add the ongoing risk of runs on Japanese banks, and interbank markets refusing to roll over their short-term paper (not just charging a Japan premium), given the ongoing lack of transparency, and nothing has changed from the previous situation despite the injection of public funds.
The bank recapitalization legislation passed by the Diet in October can form the basis for a successful financial reform in Japan. The bill as written contains the key elements required, including the needed commitment of public funds, but also the admission that some banks must close, distinctions between banks on the basis of solvency, the bolstering of an institution for the disposal of bad loans and distressed assets, and the separation of banking supervision from the Ministry of Finance. The law itself is not significantly more vague than the initial pieces of legislation that began successful financial cleanups in other OECD economies in the past decade. It is only some parts of the Japanese government's apparent intent to implement the laws with excessive regard for current bank shareholders and management, and therefore without regard for moral hazard, that might make a failure out of a success.
Recovering Some Optimism
Japan can make a rapid return to sustainable growth, and there is good reason to believe that the legislation of Fall 1998 and the FY1999 budget could make that return possible. It is heartening that, after years of ill-advised austerity by its predecessors, the Obuchi government has committed itself to passing a large fiscal stimulus package. As the Japanese Diet moves to pass the 1999 budget, it should increase the size of the stimulus to a full 20 trillion yen and, more importantly, mandate implementation of the stimulus through permanent income tax cuts. This would be a structurally sound manner of expansion that would avoid confidence destroying administrative delays.
On the financial side, the law is in place. What remains is the cleanup. Even if lenient implementation of solvency standards or political pressure to keep banks open and lending is genuinely intended to aid the Japanese economy, it will not actually do so. Luckily, market discipline in the form of continued depositors' and foreign financial firms' withdrawal of funds seems to be forcing the Obuchi government to truly solve the credit crunch in the only manner possible. Doing so will hurt less than people think. The remaining short-run contractionary effects of the financial cleanup are an additional reason why sizable fiscal stimulus must be undertaken at this time.
A Japanese-led capital outflow
from Asia and the yen decline
accompanying it would harm
the growth of Japan's already
hard-hit neighbors.
The fact that an optimistic outlook for the Japanese economy is attainable through proper implementation of fiscal and financial policies is a double-edged sword. As seen in the healthy pressures on the Japanese financial system, there remains the real risk of an outright collapse in financial and consumer confidence in Japan. Such a collapse would likely prompt capital flight, and thereby put the Japanese government in a dilemma with no easy solution—the policies necessary to restore confidence in the yen in such a situation (i.e., raising interest rates, contracting deficits) would be the exact opposite of the policies necessary to restore financial stability.7
A Japanese-led capital outflow from Asia and the yen decline accompanying it would harm the growth of Japan's already hard-hit neighbors.8 It would also further enlarge trade imbalances between Asia and the United States and Western Europe, putting additional pressure on political support for the open world economy. Thus, a failure to properly and rapidly implement the appropriate policies for restoring Japan's economic growth could provoke exactly the crisis that the Japanese government—and the world economy—must avoid.
Notes
1 Japanese fiscal expansion would play a central role in a “Concerted Asian Recovery Program” as advocated by C. Fred Bergsten, “APEC to the Rescue,” The Economist, 7 November 1998. Given its size and high level of development, Japan is the only economy in the region which can undertake fiscal expansion independently and still have significant benefits domestically as well as positive spillovers on its neighbors.
2 For a discussion of an appropriate monetary policy for Japan, see Adam S. Posen, “Japan Needs an Inflation Target,” Asian Wall Street Journal, 30 July 1998, and Restoring Japan's Economic Growth, chapter 5.
3 Restoring Japan's Economic Growth, chapter 3, discusses these relationships between private saving, public spending, and growth.
4 Like every wealthy aging country, Japan cannot meet its future social security obligations through any acceptable level of taxation. To close the shortfall, Japan must increase some combination of its birthrate, its retirement age, its immigration, or its participation of women in the workforce.
5 For more on the housing problem in Japan, see Takatoshi Ito, The Japanese Economy (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1994), chapter 14, and Bela Balassa and Marcus Noland, Japan in the World Economy (IIE, 1988), chapter 4.
6 See Michael M. Weinstein, “Economic Scene,” New York Times, 22 October 1998, p. C2.
7 I discuss this disaster scenario in chapter 4 of Restoring Japan's Economic Growth.
8 Marcus Noland, Sherman Robinson, and Zhi Wang, The Global Economic Effects of the Japanese Crisis, IIE Working Paper 98-6.

This article first appeared in The International Economy, November/December 1998.
© Institute for International Economics. All rights reserved.
Japan proposed an "Asian Monetary Fund" during the early stages of the crisis more than a year ago. The idea was never specified sufficiently to permit objective evaluation. It was nevertheless immediately rejected, mainly by other Asians (most vocally China) but also by the United States and the rest of the G-7, due to fears that it could undermine the leadership role of the International Monetary Fund and foster a split between Asia and North America.
Suitably elaborated and modified to include the United States and several other countries, however, an Asia Pacific Monetary Fund (APMF) could be extremely useful. An APMF could in fact provide a valuable regional complement for the International Monetary Fund in the same way that the Asian Development Bank (and the other regional development banks) complements the World Bank. It would respond to the strongly felt need, on the part of many Asians, for “their own institution” that will be more immediately responsive to their concerns. The subsequent deepening and broadening of the Asian economic crisis underlines the merit of creating such an institution.
The major architectural weakness revealed by the latest crisis, as with the Mexican and other crises before it, is the absence of effective early warning and early action systems. Some of the individual country problems, notably Thailand and Korea, were foreseen by at least some analysts.1 But very few anticipated the Indonesian and Malaysian meltdowns, and no one predicted the regional spread of the downturn.
The world desperately needs effective early warning systems. Such systems can now be constructed on the basis of fairly robust sets of objective economic indicators.2 They can probably be applied most effectively at the regional level, as countries in the neighborhood are much more likely than those farther away to detect emerging problems. An APMF, building on the Manila Framework created a year ago by most members of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, could provide the institutional locus for such an effort.

The major architectural weakness
revealed by the latest crisis, as with
the Mexican and other crises before
it, is the absence of effective early
warning and early action systems.
Even when looming problems such as Thailand (or Mexico) were correctly identified, however, no preventive actions weretaken. Regional peer pressure, especially in the Asia Pacific, is probably the most promising route to induce anticipatory policy measures. It is now clear, even to the usually reticent Asians, that a country's neighbors can be badly burned by its failure to head off a crisis and that they therefore have a legitimate right to apply such pressure. The eighteen key countries around the Pacific Rim have already been using such techniques to pursue APEC's program of “free and open trade and investment” by 2010/2020, with such notable successes as the Information Technology Agreement in 1996.
The Manila Framework sought to begin such a process on macroeconomic and monetary issues. The southeast Asians are pursuing a similar tack in their Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). But those processes have no formal status, secretariat or other institutional foundation and would be much more effective if rolled into an APMF.
In addition, an APMF could provide financial resources to supplement IMF programs in the region. The IMF itself can never provide enough funding for large countries, even when sharply expanding its normal quota multiple as with Korea in December 1997. Hence ad hoc packages must be constructed hurriedly, in the face of crisis, as with the “second lines of defense” that were cobbled together for all three IMF programs in the region (Thailand, Indonesia, Korea) last year.
It would be far better to have such supplementary funding available on a permanent and assured basis. The money could then be mobilized quickly as needed. The burdensharing among the donors could be worked out in advance. Japan's generous offer of a year ago, reportedly reaching $50 billion, would obviously endow the new institution with substantial resources from the outset, as would its recent “Miyazawa plan” pledge of $30 billion if rolled into the proposed regional entity.
APMF credits should be granted only in conjunction with IMF programs, to maintain the primacy of IMF adjustment requirements, though they might be disbursed more quickly to provide essential bridge finance and to counter speculative attacks. Unlike the resources of General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB) and the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB), however, APMF monies should not be lent via the Fund. The reason is that their availability to any recipient country, as with the IMF's own credits, would then be limited by the Fund's system of quotas for individual members (and whatever multiples can be agreed in a given circumstance). Hence an APMF should lend with the Fund but not to or through the Fund, with the supplementary amounts in individual cases to be agreed in consultation between the two institutions. The ability of the APMF to supplement IMF lending would obviously strengthen the new institution's clout in pursuing its primary responsibilities for early warning and early action.

It is now clear, even to the usually
reticent Asians, that a country's neighbors
can be badly burned by its failure
to head off a crisis . . .
There are three reasons why a regional scheme of this type would work only if its participation were broadened beyond the initial “Asia only” concept. First, no Asian country could effectively lead the effort. Any hint of Japanese domination will be roundly rejected by the rest of the region, as occurred a year ago, and Japan's continued economic weakness precludes its early leadership in any event. China, despite its highly responsible performance during the crisis to date, is not yet ready for such a role (and might not be widely welcomed either). There are no other candidates.
Second, an “Asia only” grouping would risk dividing rather than uniting the two sides of the Pacific. It would thus revive all the risks inherent in Prime Minister Mahathir's “East Asian Economic Group” proposal of a decade ago, which was firmly rejected in favor of APEC by virtually everybody on both sides of the Pacific. It would be especially foolhardy to risk dividing Asia and the Americas at this time of global crisis, with its desperate need for leadership from the United States.
Third, the United States could indeed play a decisive role in making an APMF work. Thoughtful Asians have in fact insisted on American participation in any such scheme, mainly because of its long (if recently tarnished) experience in leading the G-7 and its willingness to speak much more frankly than most Asians, including to other Asians, at this time in history. The United States could also provide a strong link to the IMF and help to ensure that the APMF works in concert with it at all times.
The “new international financial architecture” that will hopefully emerge from the current crisis should thus include an Asia Pacific Monetary Fund. Europe already has a comprehensive regional structure with its Economic and Monetary Union. The Western Hemisphere should create an institution à la APMF to provide an economic and financial counterpart to the pending Free Trade Area of the Americas. Japan receives full credit for initiating the regional concept but the idea needs to be modified along the lines suggested here to ensure that it makes the large contribution to future international financial stability of which it is capable.
Notes
1. For example, see my “Potential Shocks to the World Economy in 1997,” World Economic Forum, Davos, January 31, 1997.
 2. Such as those by Morris Goldstein and Carmen Reinhart that will be published shortly by the Institute for International Economics.

A shorter version of this brief appeared in The Washington Post, Outlook Section, September 20, 1998.
© Institute for International Economics. All rights reserved.
The "Asian economic crisis" is much deeper, much more pervasive and likely to last much longer than anyone imagined. Economies that had grown 6-8 percent annually for two decades are declining by like or greater amounts, a swing of depression-era magnitude with incalculable political and social consequences. The contagion has already spread far beyond Asia, engulfing Russia and much of Latin America, and could do so even more violently in the days ahead. We now face a truly global crisis, which has already hit the United States hard and will do so with increasing force.
Recovery from the crisis will clearly take several years. The afflicted countries (Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Korea, Russia and, to some extent, China and Hong Kong) need fundamental reform of their banking and corporate governance systems. These structural changes are far more difficult and socially disruptive than cutting budget deficits, money growth and overvalued exchange rates, the central responses to most previous crises. Even the most committed reformers, as in Korea and Thailand, are only beginning to make real progress and will be hard pressed to sustain political support for the needed changes in their domestic societies and power structures.
Moreover, Japan, which accounts for three quarters of the Asian economy, has plunged into recession and is already close to a "lost decade" of growth à la Latin America in the 1980s. The crisis countries must put their own houses in order but, even if they do everything right, they cannot resume satisfactory growth until Japan does so. The "flying geese" formation, whereby the rest of Asia follows the lead of Japan, may become a flock of dead ducks for a prolonged period-whereas rapid growth and open markets in the United States enabled Mexico to bounce back from its 1995 crisis after only one bad year. A renewed plunge of the yen and/or implosion of the Japanese banking system are among the most likely triggers of the next spike of the global crisis.

The "flying geese" formation, whereby
the rest of Asia follows the lead of Japan,
may become a flock of dead ducks
for a prolonged period
Four new policy strategies are needed to stop the downward spiral and provide a foundation for recovery. All require effective international cooperation and strong leadership from the United States.
First, the crisis countries should launch a concerted program of domestic expansion through sizable fiscal and monetary stimulus. Export-led recovery will not work because the countries rely too heavily on each others' markets and that of stagnant Japan, and because the US trade deficit has already hit $250 billion and will trigger protectionist reactions as soon as our unemployment starts to rise. The essential structural reforms will become more palatable in a climate of resumed growth. The International Monetary Fund will surely bless such a strategy, which would help refurbish its own image as well as get the region growing again.

First, the crisis countries should launch
a concerted program of domestic expansion
through sizable fiscal and monetary stimulus.
Fortunately, fiscal stimulus is eminently feasible because all the countries entered the crisis with solid budget positions. The stimulus can be financed partly from domestic sources and partly from activation of the "second lines of defense" which Japan, the United States and other foreign creditors have pledged to the crisis countries. Interest rates have already come down considerably but currencies have largely stabilized and thus further cuts, especially if done in concert to avoid capital shifts from one crisis country to another, are also quite doable.
The Concerted Asian Recovery Program should be launched at this year's summit of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum in mid-November, which will be attended by the President and the leaders of every country on the Pacific rim (including Russia). Host Malaysia is desperately seeking domestic expansion and should strongly support the effort. China has already begun to stimulate domestic demand and would welcome company. Japan could perhaps be persuaded by such a regional initiative to enact the large tax cuts and fundamental bank reforms that are required to reinvigorate its economy (and the entire region), which would enable it to switch dramatically from goat to hero.
Second, the United States and European Union should globalize the strategy by cutting their own interest rates. This would encourage capital reflows to the crisis countries, reduce their debt burdens and improve their competitive position by promoting a stronger yen. It would also ensure continued world growth and help prevent further stock market declines.

Second, the United States and European
Union should globalize the strategy
by cutting their own interest rates.
In the United States, real short-term interest rates (adjusted for inflation) are historically quite high. The Federal Reserve's overnight lending rate is higher than the yield on thirty-year Treasury bonds. In light of the slowdown in the American economy and the continued absence of inflation, the Fed should emulate the sharp decline that has already occurred in market rates and cut by a full percentage point. The Europeans, who have played very little role in responding to the crisis to date, are moving toward a single interest rate as they prepare to create their common currency (the euro) in January; they should converge their national interest rates at the lowest current (German) level and then follow any Fed cut at least halfway.
Third, it is time to recognize the long-term nature of the crisis and extend meaningful debt relief to the crisis countries. The world waited seven years to provide real relief for the Latin Americans via Brady bonds in the late 1980s, substantially prolonging their agony. The current debt is largely owed by banks and companies in crisis countries to a wide array of private lenders in the industrial world, which complicates its management but can be handled through consolidating each debtor country's overall position and then having the individual debtors and creditors implement the rescheduled conventions.
As with Brady bonds, the IMF should help determine the magnitude of relief needed for each country, e.g., less for Korea and more for Indonesia. Only countries complying fully with IMF programs, reoriented as described above, would qualify for negotiated relief that would maintain their standing in the capital markets. In addition to easing the crisis, the substantial burdensharing thus required from private creditors would deal with the issue of "moral hazard," under which the availability of IMF support supposedly induces reckless behavior by foreign lenders, the only serious critique of current IMF procedures.
Finally, the Congress should step into the current global leadership vacuum by passing both full funding for the IMF and new "fast track" trade negotiating authority for the President. The former is essential so that the IMF can help Argentina, Brazil, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Mexico or any of the numerous other countries that could be hit hard by the next waves of contagion.
On trade, the Republicans plan to bring "fast track" to a vote next week. A negative vote would imply that the United States, the world's strongest economy and most vocal advocate of liberalization, might close its own markets. This would send a devastating signal to the crisis countries, encouraging them to seek refuge behind new barriers as Russia and Malaysia have already done with respect to capital flows. Markets would tumble around the world and the United States, far from exercising leadership, would correctly be blamed for deepening the crisis. (Controls over capital inflows à la Chile can help prevent crises but controls over outflows, especially adopted in the midst of crisis à la Malaysia, will deter foreign investment just when it is needed and cannot promote recovery.)
President Clinton pointed in most of the correct directions in his comprehensive statement on the crisis on September 14. However, he failed to specify how to renew growth in either the crisis countries or the world economy. He called for debt restructuring but not for meaningful debt relief. He continued to pander to narrow interests in the Democratic Party by opposing early passage of his own trade legislation.

Third, it is time to recognize the long-term
nature of the crisis and extend meaningful
debt relief to the crisis countries.
The President took a very important step, however, by asking the finance ministers and central bank governors of the "G-7 and key emerging economies," the new G-22, to report to their heads of state on all these issues by the end of the year. Financial crises and the financial system are far too important to be left to financial officials. Only the engagement of G-7 summits produced the modest systemic improvements adopted by the IMF and G-7 itself after the Mexican crisis in 1995. Engagement of political leaders is essential to counter the leadership crisis that is adding so greatly to market uncertainties and global economic deterioration. The crisis countries of course bear primary responsibility for restoring their own economic health but the ability of the global community to deliver a program along the lines suggested here will go far to determine the course of the world economy for years to come.

© Institute for International Economics. All rights reserved.
For the last 50 years, progress toward multilateral trade liberalization has depended heavily on agreement between the United States and the European Union. This Policy Brief argues that the current form of transatlantic economic cooperation—known as the Transatlantic Economic Partnership—is so limited that it runs the risk of diminishing this tradition. The follow-on action plan now being negotiated between Washington and Brussels, however, could provide much-needed momentum to the global trading system and should thus be viewed as an opportunity to restore the traditional pattern.
Origin of the Transatlantic Economic Partnership
Announced at the Birmingham summit of May 1998, the Transatlantic Economic Partnership traces back to the 1995 US-EU summit in Madrid, where Presidents Clinton and Santer announced a New Transatlantic Agenda. The agenda was essentially a political gesture intended to underscore the staying power of the transatlantic alliance and to offset a series of specific strains ranging from Bosnia to US economic sanctions. The economic pillar of the agenda was a Transatlantic Marketplace, to be achieved by “progressively reducing or eliminating barriers that hinder the flow of goods, services, and capital.” A new private sector group, the Transatlantic Business Dialogue (TABD), was established to define and promote the specific trade and investment agenda needed to bring the marketplace to fruition.
The 1995 summit sought to enunciate what Secretary of State Warren Christopher had heralded six months earlier: a common vision, a common purpose, and a common transatlantic agenda.1 But the Marketplace initiative was disappointingly vague. It was not defined with any specificity, included no commitment to comprehensive coverage, and lacked an overarching deadline for achievement. Not surprisingly, it never achieved any political momentum.
The one substantive achievement stemming from the Marketplace initiative was regulatory cooperation. Thanks in large part to the TABD, Washington and Brussels reached agreement in 1997—after years of effort—on a package of mutual recognition agreements (MRAs) eliminating duplicative testing and certification in six sectors.2 The US government estimates that this package, which covers about $47 billion worth of trade, eliminates costs equivalent to two or three percentage points of tariffs.3
In the meantime, other problems arose that soured the prospects for broader transatlantic economic cooperation. Chief among these was US sanctions legislation, namely, the Helms-Burton and D'Amato laws (directed at Cuba and Iran/Libya, respectively). Europeans reacted furiously to US efforts to impose sanctions on their companies and citizens, quickly invoking blocking legislation and launching a dispute settlement case in the World Trade Organization (WTO). A compromise solution, also announced at the Birmingham summit, provides for active EU support for certain US policy goals in return for exemptions from specific provisions of the sanctions laws. This agreement, however, has still not secured congressional approval.
In addition, several agricultural quarrels related to biotechnology have escalated. The US-EU trade quarrel du jour centers on resistance in several EU member states to importing genetically modified strains of corn, soybeans, and other commodities from the United States.
For the last 50 years, progress toward
multilateral trade liberalization has depended
heavily on agreement between the
United States and the European Union.

Mindful of these new disputes, and hoping to restore momentum to the process of trade liberalization, the European Commission proposed to EU member states in March 1998 a formal agreement that would establish a Transatlantic Marketplace with the United States. Spearheaded by Commission Vice President Sir Leon Brittan, this version of the marketplace proposal laid out an ambitious agenda covering both bilateral and multilateral topics. The proposed agreement envisaged such measures as zero tariffs on industrial goods by 2010, a free trade area in services, and a bilateral agreement on investment. Notable exclusions, however, included agriculture and audiovisual services.
For both substantive and tactical reasons, the Brittan initiative failed to secure the support of several EU member governments, most notably (and vociferously) France. But the transatlantic impulse did not die. Most of the topics covered in the Brittan initiative survived, albeit in a greatly watered down version, and were collectively renamed the Transatlantic Economic Partnership.
Content of the Transatlantic Economic Partnership
The document issued at the Birmingham summit was, however, little more than a vague, bare-bones outline of the Transatlantic Economic Partnership. Discussions are now underway to flesh out an action plan. Although it is too early to say what the action plan will consist of, a few facts seem clear.
This time around, the transatlantic thrust is primarily multilateral. Gone are the would-be bilateral commitments to zero industrial tariffs by 2010, a free trade area in services, and a transatlantic investment agreement. Initiatives on industrial tariffs and the liberalization of services sit squarely in the context of the WTO, while those on investment, competition, public procurement, and the environment refer to “appropriate multilateral fora” (this wording suggests, but does not spell out, a commitment to a new WTO round, as also proposed by Sir Leon Brittan under the label of the “Millenium Round”). Language on government procurement refers mainly to facilitation of bidding (e.g., through electronic notification of requests for procurement). The commitment to improved intellectual property protection is understood to refer mainly to enforcement of the WTO's agreement on Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) agreement in third countries, although bilateral initiatives may be included as well. There may be new language on worker rights. The prickly question of sanctions is addressed in a separate document, “Transatlantic Partnership on Political Cooperation”.4
Building on the prior success of MRA negotiations, the most explicit commitments in the Transatlantic Economic Partnership have to do with overcoming regulatory obstacles. Those named include technical barriers to trade, the treatment of biotechnology, and sanitary and phytosanitary standards (governing the treatment of animals and plants, respectively). Listed as “instruments” are MRAs, scientific and regulatory dialogue, and a high degree of transparency and consultation. Services are covered as well, but for the most part the focus is on reaching a consensus in advance so that future regulations (e.g., those arising from new technology) can be standardized or harmonized. Such negotiations are well suited to a bilateral framework because mutual recognition agreements and similar accords encompass country-specific facilities and procedures and are thus necessarily bilateral.
Observations
The document issued in Birmingham represented little more than a vague outline. The action plan now being negotiated may have a little more “meat,” but truly ambitious targets are unlikely at present. Still, the exercise may prove to be valuable. This mixed assessment rests on the following observations:
A transatlantic initiative is not a high priority in Brussels at this time. Too many other events and evolutions are competing for policy-level attention: internal developments include European Monetary Union; the deregulation of key sectors, including telecommunications and financial services; and a range of institutional questions, ranging from voting procedures to the expanding role of the European Parliament. External competitors include the enlargement of the European Union toward the east; developments in the former Yugoslavia; relations with Russia; the fate of the Lome agreement; and EU activities in Latin America, notably negotiations with Mexico to establish a free trade agreement and the first-ever EU-Latin American summit, scheduled for 1999 in Brazil.

The Clinton administration is not focusing much on trade. Despite pressure from House Republicans, the administration wants to postpone the effort to secure congressional renewal of fast-track trade agreement authority until some time after the 1998 elections. (An ambitious transatlantic initiative could be of help in winning the fast-track debate in 1999, if it is combined with the current Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum and Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) initiatives as well as with the WTO.) Trade remains a highly divisive issue within the Democratic Party.

Not surprisingly, therefore, signs of commitment to real progress are weak on both sides. Neither the United States nor the European Union has demonstrated a real commitment to new trade liberalization at this point in time. Nor does the Transatlantic Economic Partnership live up to its middle name, since a truly “economic” agreement would include cooperation on external monetary policy. Despite the advent of the euro and the formal opening of the European Central Bank, transatlantic cooperation in this area is still woefully underdeveloped.5 A truly ambitious, comprehensive, strategic commitment to open trade and investment—similar to the North Atlantic Economic Community (NATEC) that I proposed last year—is nowhere in sight.6

Nevertheless, officials on both sides of the Atlantic see value in the partnership because of its emphasis on regulatory harmonization. The partnership's emphasis on overcoming regulatory barriers reflects the high level of investment between the European Union and the United States. As of 1997, European companies accounted for 62% of foreign direct investment in the United States ($425.2 billion), compared with 22% from Asian companies. 49% of US direct investment abroad ($420.9 billion) has gone to Western Europe, compared with only 17% to Asia.7 Duplicative test and certification procedures cost these companies a lot of money—over $1 billion a year for the U.S. information technology industry alone.
Since both Americans and Europeans maintain high levels of health, safety, and environmental protection, regulatory authorities should be able to agree on how to protect their citizens. But regulators on the two sides of the Atlantic reflect different traditions, answer to different constituencies, and see little reason to change their standards and procedures, especially when they face intense public pressure from nongovernment organizations. The partnership could help to overcome these cultural and political barriers.

The failure of the Brittan initiative may have cleared the way for more focused thinking about global trade liberalization in the WTO. The partnership announcement asserts that the United States and the European Union will give “priority” to pursuing their objectives through the WTO and that their “primary goal” is multilateral liberalization. The Dutch and others resisted Sir Leon's notion of a free trade area in services in part because they wanted to avoid undermining the WTO. Several EU member governments are in favor of a new Millenium Round, but neither the European Union as a whole nor the Clinton administration has committed itself to an ambitious WTO agenda. The United States has agreed, however, to chair the next WTO ministerial meeting in late 1999—and thus implicitly to take the lead in forging the next set of major multilateral trade talks.
Conclusions
The Transatlantic Economic Partnership is so foggy and limited that one might well ask whether it is needed at all. After all, pressures stemming from globalization are pushing Brussels and Washington in the direction of liberalization anyway. Why bother? A partial answer is that the partnership adds limited but positive synergy to transatlantic economic cooperation, especially in the regulatory area. As one American official puts it, the partnership forces both sides to produce bigger “deliverables” at each summit than would otherwise be the case. Depending on the content of the action plan, another answer is that the partnership, if properly designed and publicized, could help to get the global trade “bicycle” moving forward again.
The action plan now being negotiated
may have a little more "meat," but truly
ambitious targets are unlikely at present.

Such momentum could be particularly helpful in the United States, which is already facing a domestic stalemate over trade policy—as reflected in the president's inability to obtain new fast-track authority since 1994, despite the strength of the economy. This stalemate could easily worsen, as the country is likely to experience both slower growth and a sharply rising trade deficit with Asia. Europe, with its stubbornly high rates of unemployment, could benefit from renewed momentum as well. Finally, cooperation between the world's two biggest economies sets a good example for others. Tackling new issues in a spirit of cooperation improves the atmosphere in Geneva and may set a precedent for future multilateral agreements.
A few reservations are nonetheless in order. While the new emphasis on multilateral agreement is welcome, the partnership is not yet ambitious enough to “ratchet up” the multilateral system. It is not even a potential “economic cooperation forum” that has adopted ambitious trade liberalization goals, as APEC has—let alone an “economic community” along the lines of the proposed NATEC. If the transatlantic partners are going to limit themselves to regulatory cooperation, they should not give their efforts grandiose titles.
If, on the contrary, the United States and the European Union want to reassert global economic leadership in a serious way, they should consider adopting a broad vision and a strategy, with an overall deadline for open trade and investment.8 An explicit commitment to external monetary policy cooperation would also be timely.
The usual objection to an ambitious commitment to joint action is that it is worthless unless it contains both detailed goals and meaningful enforcement procedures. At present, the United States lacks fast-track authority and the European Commission faces multiple distractions. Neither side is exactly overflowing with political will.
Nevertheless, an effort to define an ambitious bilateral and multilateral agenda is worthwhile. Indeed, it is essential to help to reverse the current malaise and get the trade bicycle rolling again. Experience with APEC demonstrates that the mere existence of a commitment to open trade and investment by a date certain generates momentum. A broad commitment of an APEC (or NATEC) variety would capture political attention and add political momentum to this unfulfilled partnership.
Notes
1. "Charting a Transatlantic Agenda for the 21st Century," speech by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Casa de America, Madrid, Spain, 2 June 1995.
2. Telecommunications, radio transmitters, electric and electronic products, pharmaceuticals, medical devices, and recreational marine craft.
3. USTR press release, 28 May 1997, and Department of Commerce press release, 13 June 1997.
4. The Transatlantic Economic Partnership and other documents can be found on the European Commission's Web site, http://www.europa.eu.int.
5. C. Fred Bergsten. 1997. “The Dollar and the Euro.” Foreign Affairs 76, no. 4 (July/August): 83-95. See also C. Randall Henning. 1997. Cooperating with Europe's Monetary Union Policy Analyses in International Economics 49, Washington: Institute for International Economics.
6. Ellen L. Frost. 1997. Transatlantic Trade: A Strategic Objective Policy Analyses in International Economics 48, Washington: Institute for International Economics.
7. Figures are on a historical-cost basis (Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce).
8. For example, free trade by 2010. See C. Fred Bergsten. 1996. “Globalizing Free Trade.” Foreign Affairs 75, no. 3 (May/June), 105-120.

The World Bank began this decade talking of Asian miracles. It may enter the next one speaking of Asian depressions. After World Bank Vice President for Asia Jean-Michel Severino used the “d” word in May to describe the course of events in developing Asia, the organization was forced to come up with a technical definition for what had been a term of art.1
Depressing the news has been. Since July 1997, many of the region's bourses have fallen by half or more. The region's currencies have declined by even greater magnitudes against the US dollar. Growth forecasts have been steadily ratcheted down. Now, there is fear of a ripple of contagion throughout the rest of the world.
In the United States, the effect of the Asian crisis has been to slow growth, generate real exchange rate appreciation, and contribute to a growing trade imbalance. In Global Economic Effects of the Asian Currency Devaluations, we analyzed the impact of events in Asia on both the region and the rest of the world.2 In this piece, we update our analysis to take into account several events—most notably, the dramatic decline in the Japanese yen—that have occurred since the earlier work went to press.
Analytical Background
To analyze the impact of the Asian crisis on production and trade across the world economy, we developed a computable general equilibrium (CGE) model that divides the world economy into 17 regions and 14 sectors. In the model, the regions are linked by trade in differentiated products, and there are detailed data on sectoral output, employment, and trade. The model does not contain an explicit time dimension and, hence, it is not well suited for quarterly forecasting. Instead, it is more useful for analyzing the underlying structural changes that accompany adjustment. The Asian crisis is modeled as a set of real effective exchange rate depreciations across Asia that are paired with supply-side contractions to capture the impact of financial disintermediation on the ability of these economies to respond to the exchange rate change. In Global Economic Effects of the Asian Currency Devaluations, we calibrated these shocks on the basis of developments between July 1997 and February 1998 and presented “low,” “high,” and “medium” shock scenarios.
. . . the case of Japan has been
more surprising and, at least from the standpoint
of the rest of the world, more disturbing.

Our analysis indicated that, broadly speaking, countries fall into four groups: the most affected countries (Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and South Korea); intermediate countries (Japan, Taiwan, and Singapore); the rest of the industrial world (Western Europe, the United States, and Australia and New Zealand); and the unique case of China. We predicted that the most affected countries experience substantial falls in output and significant positive swings in their trade balances, in large part due to import compression. Consequently, domestic absorption (the resources available for domestic use or aggregate final demand) falls dramatically in these countries. Investment, in particular, collapses, and with it demand for local construction services, imported capital goods, and industrial intermediates. We obtained these qualitative results regardless of the scenario-specific pattern of exchange rate and supply-side contractions that we assumed.
The results for the second set of economies were more subtle and sensitive to variations in the underlying assumptions, even in qualitative terms. These economies experience real exchange rate appreciations vis-à-vis the most affected countries, but real depreciations against the rest of the world. The net impact of the crisis on these countries depends on their unique, economy-specific, trade links with other regions. So, for example, in our “medium shock” scenario, the Japanese machinery sector experiences a decline in output as important export markets in developing Asia dry up. In contrast, the motor vehicle industry—less tightly linked to the rest of Asia—expands as Japanese automakers increased their relative competitiveness in markets such as the United States and Western Europe.
The results in the rest of the industrial world were a mirror image of the adjustments in the most affected parts of Asia. In this group of countries, the traded-goods sectors contract due to a decline in exports of capital goods to Asia, where investment had collapsed, and due to increased competition from imports in a broad range of manufactures. For example, our model showed that the US machinery sector contracts by around 3 percent because of the crisis. At the same time, the nontraded goods sector actually expands, because sectors such as construction are stimulated by falling interest rates, by the positive income effect of the appreciating exchange rate, and by the release of resources from the traded-goods sector. In the United States, housing and construction activity increases by around 1 percent directly as a result of the Asian crisis.
In aggregate, the greatest impact is felt in Western Europe, the largest single region in the model. The greatest relative impact is felt in Australia and New Zealand, the two countries most intimately bound to Asia. Indeed, the recent collapse of the Australia dollar is evidence of the Australian economy's inability to adjust to a shock of the magnitude that it has experienced because of the Asian crisis. The update on our model that we provide in the next section of this policy brief takes into account this collapse.
One congressman claimed that
the increase in the trade deficit ‘is a
direct result of poor trade policies'
and ‘is at an all-time high
because of our government's
irresponsible trade policy.'

In our original model, changes in world trade patterns due to the Asian crisis affect the United States, generating significant deterioration in its balance of trade and changes in the structure of exports, imports, and production. Competing domestic producers notice increased imports and often react by seeking assistance from the government. Our analysis of trade policy issues indicated that bilateral trade tensions are largely a function of bilateral trade imbalances—the bigger the US-Japanese trade imbalance, the more that US producers complain about competition from Japanese imports.
While economists argue that the aggregate trade balance is a macroeconomic phenomenon and that bilateral balances are irrelevant, our econometric analysis indicated that any deterioration in the trade balance leads to increased trade tension with the countries most affected. Our results indicated that the Asian crisis generates a significant increase in the US trade deficit, especially with Japan and South Korea, and we concluded that an increase in trade disputes could be expected on the basis of the historical record. The process has already begun. One congressman greeted the May trade figures with a press release claiming that the increase in the trade deficit “is a direct result of poor trade policies” and “is at an all-time high because of our government's irresponsible trade policy.”3 Other congressmen will undoubtedly follow, and the political pressure to close the US market will surely grow.
Finally, there is China—the shoe that has yet to drop. We estimated that the crisis has a relatively modest impact on China's external balances. Ceteris paribus, a real devaluation of under 10 percent is sufficient to restore China's precrisis trade surplus. Yet, given the enormous internal problems that China confronts and the likelihood that a Chinese devaluation would spark another round of financial turbulence in Asia, we counseled (and continue to counsel) that China pursue alternatives to currency devaluation to address the need to maintain aggregate demand while restructuring its state-owned enterprises. At least to this point, Chinese policy has followed that advice.
Updating the Results
For some countries, such as Thailand and South Korea, the “medium shock” assumptions have proved remarkably prescient. For other countries, most notably Indonesia and Japan, performance since February has been worse than even our “high shock” case predicted. (In the case of Indonesia, this was to be expected—it was clear that the political transition in Indonesia was well beyond “normal” economic experience, and the country's adjustment to the crisis could take forms such as hyperinflation or famine that simply could not be captured by the model.)
However, the case of Japan has been more surprising and, at least from the standpoint of the rest of the world, more disturbing. Japan's real exchange rate remained roughly stable from July 1997 through March 1998 but then began a steady slide, falling by more than 10 percent between March and June. At the same time, Japan entered a recession, registering negative growth in the fourth quarter of 1997 and the first quarter of 1998. (Results for the second quarter of 1998 have not yet been released.)
Table 1, based on our updated model, reports the changes in global trade balances that arise from several Asian crisis scenarios, while table 2, also based on our updated model, reports some key bilateral balances. The first line, labeled “scenario 1,” reports the model's results when we program the exchange rate and supply-side shocks that were experienced between July 1997 and June 1998 in developing Asia and Australia and New Zealand but do not program any Japanese adjustment. (We annualize the numbers once adjustment has occurred. One could interpret these as approximating what might be observed in calendar year 1999.) In this mental experiment, the developing Asia countries generate increased trade surpluses of more than $150 billion dollars.
Scenario 2 includes the exchange rate and supply-side shocks that were experienced between July 1997 and June 1998 in developing Asia and Australia and New Zealand as well as a 10 percent depreciation of Japan's real effective exchange rate and a 2 percent supply-side contraction of the Japanese economy, approximating what has actually occurred. (Given the other economies' exchange rate changes, this is equivalent to a yen-dollar rate of around 135.) The impact is to increase Japan's trade balance by nearly $90 billion, reversing Japan's trade balance losses in the first experiment and generating a surplus of $55 billion relative to the baseline solution. Relative to the thought experiment represented by scenario 1, Japan “takes back” more than $20 billion from the trade balances of developing Asia, because the positive swings in their trade balances with Japan in scenario 1 are eroded and Japan gains market share in third country markets such as the United States. Indeed, developing Asia loses more in scenario 2 than the $19 billion Japan pledged in the “second line of defense” commitments as part of the International Monetary Fund's programs with Thailand, Indonesia, and South Korea.
The global positions of the United States and Western Europe decline by roughly $25 billion each in this scenario. For the United States, this implies that the Asian crisis to date adds nearly $60 billion to the trade deficit in nominal terms and even more in real terms (relevant to production and employment) when the fall in import prices associated with the real appreciation are taken into account. As shown in table 2, most of this increase is in US bilateral deficits with Japan and South Korea, which grow by $25 billion and $10 billion, respectively.
In scenario 3, the Japanese real exchange rate depreciates by 20 percent (roughly equivalent to a yen-dollar rate of 155), and the economy experiences a negative 4 percent supply-side shock. This experiment goes beyond what we have observed in 1998 and indicates what could happen if the problems in Japan intensify. The Japanese surplus increases by another $80 billion, or nearly $170 billion relative to the base. The external balances of the United States, Western Europe, and developing Asia each deteriorate by an additional $15-20 billion. As shown in table 2, South Korean gains vis-à-vis Japan are completely wiped out under this scenario.
Some have argued that a significant depreciation of the yen is necessary to restore economic growth in Japan,4 and one commentator has gone so far as to argue that “all Asian economies and the world economy would be far better off with Japan moving to a 2-3 percent sustainable growth rate and the yen somewhere between 150 and 200 per dollar than with continued stagnation and a stable yen.”5 Our model allows us to examine this proposition directly. In scenario 4, we depreciate the yen 30 percent in real terms and augment Japanese total factor productivity by 3 percent.
The results reported in tables 1 and 2 do not support this contention. Although the Japanese output increase partly offsets the impact of the depreciation, the relative price effect through the exchange rate change still predominates, and the Japanese surplus increases nearly $130 billion relative to scenario 2, the adjustment which has occurred thus far, almost $40 billion of which is accounted for by an increase in the Japanese surplus with the United States. In this scenario, Japan reduces the global trade surpluses of Thailand, Indonesia, and South Korea by more than its bilateral aid commitments. While it is certainly true that more robust growth in Japan could have beneficial externalities not captured by this model (e.g., by facilitating resolution of the Japanese banking problems and restoring capital flows to the rest of Asia), the evidence from the real side of the economy does not support the proposition that Asia and the rest of the world would be better off with substantially more yen depreciation even if accompanied by growth in Japan. Rather than relying on export-led recovery to reinvigorate its economy at the expense of the rest of Asia, Japan should undertake policies as outlined in Adam Posen's Restoring Japan's Economic Growth to generate a domestic demand-led expansion and pull itself and the rest of the region out of recession.6
Conclusion
This policy brief summarizes and updates our recent work on the global economic effects of the crisis in Asia, the most important new development being the deterioration of conditions in Japan. While oceans of ink have been spilled on a prospective devaluation in China, the ongoing depreciation of the yen is a much greater threat to the region and the world at large.
While a depreciation of the yen may be a necessary component of Japanese adjustment, it is critical that Japan not rely predominately on external demand to extricate itself from recession. Such a development in Japan would significantly impair the ability of the poorer, more deeply affected, Asian countries to recover from the crisis. In the United States, the projected record trade deficit and the rising deficits with Japan will undoubtedly contribute to protectionist political pressures. For Japan to pursue such a course of action when other alternatives are available is folly. 
Table 1: Change in global trade balances (billions of dollars)


 
United States
Western Europe
Australia and New Zealand
Japan
China
Developing Asia
Rest of World
 














Scenario 1
(Asian adjustment through June 1998, except Japan)
-34.6
-50.4
8.2
-33.1
-11.0
151.8
-30.8
Scenario 2
(10 percent Japanese depreciation plus 2 percent negative supply-side shock)
-58.0
-75.8
6.0
55.2
-15.8
129.5
-41.1
Scenario 3
(20 percent Japanese depreciation plus 4 percent negative supply-side shock)
-79.5
-100.0
4.1
135.2
-19.9
110.1
-50.0
Scenario 4
(30 percent Japanese devaluation plus 3 percent positive supply-side shock)
-96.4
-120.4
3.7
184.9
-21.0
99.7
-50.5


Table 2: Change in key bilateral trade balances (billions of dollars)


 
US-Japan
US-China
US-South Korea
Japan-South Korea
Japan-China
 










Scenario 1
(Asian adjustment through June 1998, except Japan)
-2.0
0.2
-10.0
-9.0
0.7
Scenario 2
(10 percent Japanese depreciation plus 2 percent negative supply-side shock)
-25.0
-0.2
-10.3
-4.1
8.7
Scenario 3
(20 percent Japanese depreciation plus 4 percent negative supply-side shock)
-46.3
-0.5
-10.8
0.0
15.9
Scenario 4
(30 percent Japanese depreciation plus 3 percent positive supply-side shock)
-62.7
-0.8
-10.7
-2.0
19.8


Notes
1. The World Bank settled on the following technical definition: A fall in income equal to or greater than the 26 percent decline in output experienced by the US between 1929 and 1932. For the United States, the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) defines a “recession” as occurring when there are two consecutive quarters of GDP decline.
2. Marcus Noland, LiGang Liu, Sherman Robinson, and Zhi Wang. 1998. The Global Economic Effects of the Asian Currency Devaluations. Washington: Institute for International Economics.
3. Representative Sherrod Brown, “Increased Trade Deficit Points to Failed U.S. Trade Policies,” 17 July 1998.
4. Allan Meltzer, “Time To Print Money,” Financial Times, 17 July 1998.
5. John Makin. 1998 Mr. Greenspan's Dilemma. Washington: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research (August).
6. Adam Posen. 1998. Restoring Japan's Economic Growth. Washington: Institute for International Economics (September).

Reprinted from The Washington Post, Outlook Section, July 12, 1998.
© Institute for International Economics. All rights reserved.
Stating the obvious, President Clinton recently lamented that the United States has become "sanctions happy." Clinton, of course, is the same president who has signed laws for new punitive measures against India, Pakistan, Cuba, Iran and Libya and has used his executive powers to add to the rich legacy of sanctions inherited from past occupants of the White House.
No country in the world has employed sanctions as often as the United States has. The American infatuation with economic sanctions was sparked by President Woodrow Wilson when he was trying to sell the idea of the League of Nations to his countrymen, together with its newly crafted economic weaponry. Wilson famously declared in 1919: "A nation boycotted is a nation that is in sight of surrender. Apply this economic, peaceful, silent, deadly remedy and there will be no need for force. It is a terrible remedy." America didn't buy the League-the Senate refused to ratify U.S. membership in that precursor to the United Nations-but as the decades rolled on, America adopted Wilson's idea of sanctions as a diplomatic tool.
During this century, the United States has imposed economic sanctions more than 110 times. Economic sanctions entail the denial of customary export, import or financial relations with a target country in an effort to change the country's laws or policies. For example, the United States may seek to block World Bank or International Monetary Fund loans in an effort to stem nuclear proliferation (India and Pakistan); or it may restrict trade with a country to change its human rights policies (Argentina, Chile and China). The current inventory of U.S. sanctions covers 26 target countries, accounting for over half of the world's population (see table). Since the demise of the Soviet Union, Congress has felt freer to interfere in foreign policy, instructing the president on the minute details of imposing and waiving sanctions. In short, whenever tensions rise, sanctions become the favorite tonic of American diplomacy.
What have we learned from this grand experiment in the diplomatic laboratory? Quite a lot. First, as a substitute for military force-the Wilsonian notion-sanctions seldom achieve the desired change in the conduct of foreign countries. In plain language: Wilson was wrong. Perhaps one episode in five results in discernible changes abroad that can be traced to sanctions. The most recent qualified success was the election of Andres Pastrana as president of Colombia last month, following several years of U.S. sanctions directed personally against his predecessor, Ernesto Samper. Charging that Samper had accepted $6 million from the Cali drug cartel for his 1994 presidential campaign, the United States disqualified Colombia as a recipient of U.S. aid and took the unusual step of revoking Samper's entry visa, in effect declaring him persona non grata. These steps were, of course, not the only reason for Pastrana's victory, and probably not the major reason, but they were a contributing factor. Against this qualified success must be listed many unqualified failures: Haiti, Cuba, Libya, Iran, Iraq and China, to name the most prominent.
". . . sanctions seldom achieve
the desired change in the conduct of
foreign countries."
Advocates of sanctions offer South Africa as their favorite example. Economic sanctions were not the deciding factor, but they helped pressure F.W. de Klerk to concede power to Nelson Mandela in 1994. Why doesn't the South African experience translate to Burma, Sudan, India and other miscreants? One reason is that South African sanctions were multilateral, not just a U.S. initiative. Another reason is that, even under apartheid, South Africa was semi-democratic, and the white minority cared what the rest of the world thought.
In fact, this is one of the ironies: Democratic countries, where the elite cares what the rest of the world thinks, are far more susceptible to sanctions than authoritarian countries isolated from world opinion. The contrast between Sudan and South Africa, or between Cuba and Colombia, could not be sharper. An unintended consequence of financial sanctions against Pakistan, a weak but semi-democratic state, open to world opinion, is that the penalties may help topple the government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif-as Pakistan slips into deep economic depression-and pave the way for a truly authoritarian and fundamentalist regime.
The second lesson from the diplomatic lab is that it is naive to think of sanctions as a substitute for force when dealing with authoritarian powers. Draconian sanctions made little difference to the policies of Manuel Antonio Noriega in Panama, Raoul Cedras in Haiti or Saddam Hussein in Iraq. Only the use of force changed the governments of Panama and Haiti, and pushed Iraq out of Kuwait. The threat of force tempered Saddam's resistance to U.N. arms inspections early in 1998. But far more often, when U.S. presidents impose sanctions, they see them as an isolated measure, not as part of an escalating "force curve"-a steady progression from diplomatic protest, to economic sanctions, to military intervention; at each step, the target country knows worse is yet to come. The result of treating sanctions as a disconnected policy measure is that the United States has acquired a well-deserved reputation for bluffing: If an authoritarian adversary can withstand sanctions, it need not fear a surprise attack.
A third lesson is that economic sanctions can inflict pain on innocent people while at the same time increasing the grip of the leaders we despise. When sanctions are applied broadside-as against Haiti, Cuba and Iraq-the hardest hit are the most vulnerable: the poor, the very young, the very old and the sick. Left unharmed, and often strengthened, are the real targets: the political, military and economic elites.
A fourth lesson is that sanctions applied hard and fast are more likely to succeed (all other circumstances being equal) than sanctions applied soft and slow. But this lesson poses a dilemma. Hard sanctions usually require multilateral cooperation, if not from the U.N. Security Council, at least from the industrial democracies. While the United States may be the sole military superpower, it is not the only economic player. Without the cooperation of Canada, Western Europe and Japan, the United States alone cannot deny a target country key imports, critical markets or vital finance. So the prescription for hard sanctions-sanctions with both economic and moral effect-amounts to a caution against going it alone. On the other hand, multilateral cooperation takes time to arrange, and often is unachievable. Quick U.N. sanctions against Iraq in 1990 were a notable exception; more typical was the measured international response to India's recent nuclear weapons tests.
Another dilemma posed by the "hard and fast" lesson is that in circumstances where sanctions alone have the best chance of success-against societies that are semi-democratic and open to world opinion-it goes against the American spirit to pile on. Instead, we prefer to escalate sanctions slowly so as to give leaders of the target countries time to reconsider. This tactic also gives them time to take evasive measures.
So why not just muddle along with our sanctions policy? After all, in the view of many American officials, the United States has a special responsibility to deal with misdeeds in many places, ranging from religious persecution in Russia and China to despots in Cuba and Burma. But since military force is too costly and diplomacy is too feeble, why not apply economic sanctions as the global salve to problems abroad and consciences at home? Why not drink the marvelous tonic of foreign policy on the cheap?
The reason, again to quote President Wilson, if not in the sense he intended, is that sanctions are a "terrible remedy." Start with the domestic costs. Estimates made by Kimberly Elliott, Jeffrey Schott and myself indicate that economic sanctions in place today cost the United States some $20 billion in lost exports annually, depriving American workers of some 200,000 well-paid jobs. It would be one thing if these costs were compensated from the public purse, so that everyone shared the burden; it is quite another when the costs are concentrated episodically on individual American firms and communities.
Then consider the morality. U.S. economic sanctions, along with Fidel Castro's own mismanagement, have helped close the income gap between Haiti and Cuba-by driving Cuban living standards downward toward the desperate Haitian level. Speaking of Haiti, that blighted economy has yet to recover from penalties imposed by the first Clinton administration. The multitudinous poor in Iraq, Iran and Vietnam are that much more miserable thanks to prolonged sanctions. With a little resolve, we could also worsen the lives of Nigerians, Indonesians and Burmese. Pope John Paul II had a point when he said during his visit to Cuba in January that the effects of economic sanctions are "always deplorable, because they hurt the most needy"-in effect, that ordinary Cubans, not Castro and his inner circle, are paying the price. The same would happen in these other ill-governed countries.
Finally, the liberal application of sanctions to every cause and country badly erodes U.S. leadership. When the United States applies sanctions to half the world's people, and when it imposes secondary sanctions on allies and friends, it prompts a reaction against American hegemony. Sanctions against China have neither shaken the leadership nor hindered the country's drive for growth. Sanctions against India will have approximately the same lack of effect. And few secondary sanctions do more than irritate U.S. allies. (Americans, above all, should understand symbolic offenses. The tea tax imposed no real economic hardship on colonial Boston. It did inspire a revolution against the greatest power of the day.)
". . . economic sanctions in place today
cost the United States some
$20 billion in lost exports annually,
depriving American workers of some
200,000 well-paid jobs."
Recovery from this love affair will require decisive steps by the White House and the Congress. Clinton appears ready to start the cure, but much more needs to be done. Passage of the sanctions reform bill, introduced last fall by Sen. Richard Lugar (R-Ind.) and Reps. Lee Hamilton (D-Ind.) and Phil Crane (R-Ill.), would be a useful next step. This bill seeks "to establish an effective framework for consideration by the legislative and executive branches of unilateral economic sanctions." It proposes several sensible guidelines when economic sanctions are considered, either by the president or Congress.
The procedural reforms include increased executive branch consultation with Congress, public hearings, a cost-benefit analysis, a preference for targeted and multilateral measures whenever possible, presidential waivers for all legislatively imposed sanctions and sanctity of contracts. If passed, Hamilton-Lugar would be a landmark law.
But additional steps are still needed:
The United States should rarely impose sanctions when it cannot get the support of its friends. This Hamilton-Lugar benchmark needs to become standard operating procedure. Ideally, the U.N. Security Council should support the sanctions. At a minimum, the NATO allies, or groups of like-minded states in Latin America, Asia or the Middle East should endorse the effort.
We should realize that the huge inventory of sanctions now in place could have tremendous value as diplomatic carrots, if the president were able to withdraw them to reward good foreign behavior. For that, the president must have unfettered freedom to lift sanctions step by step. Hamilton-Lugar states that the president "should" have waiver authority when Congress enacts a new sanctions measure. The Justice Department needs to go further than that: It should challenge in court any sanctions legislation that does not contain a national interest waiver that the president can exercise. The Glenn Amendment, mandating sanctions against India and Pakistan for their nuclear explosions, would make an excellent test case. Mandatory legislation of this nature unconstitutionally infringes the president's power in the realm of foreign affairs.
When dealing with authoritarian regimes, the president should direct sanctions at rulers, not the populace at large. Iraqis are not our enemies. Nor are Cubans. We can single out individuals and agencies that give offense or outrage. We can devise civil and criminal penalties, buttressed by bounties, so that their persons and property are at risk whenever they venture outside their own territory.
Finally, when the president imposes comprehensive sanctions on an authoritarian regime, he should view those sanctions as a prelude to the exercise of military force, not as a substitute for force. Unless we are prepared to remove bad governments with military force, we have no business heaping prolonged punishment on innocent people.
'A Terrible Remedy'
Ongoing foreign policy sanctions, defined as the "deliberate, government-inspired withdrawal, or threat of withdrawal, of customary trade or financial relations," have been imposed either multilaterally or by the United States on the following nations:
Target Country
Initial Year
Type of Sanctions
Precipitating Event
Key Changes to Sanctions
Angola
1993
Limited trade restrictions (arms and oil embargo); Air and travel sanctions
Failure to implement peace agreement
Air and travel ban (1997); Ban on UNITA diamond exports (1998)
Azerbaijan
1992
Restrictions on financial assistance (including Overseas Private Investment Corp.)
Embargo of Armenia over Nagorno-Karabakh
 
Burma
1988
Restrictions on aid (including U.S. Export-Import Bank, OPIC), travel restrictions, Ban on trade preferences, Investment ban
Repression of political opposition
Massachusetts state sanctions (1996), Ban on new U.S. investments (1997)
Cambodia
1992
Limited trade restrictions (log boycott; oil embargo)
Failure to implement peace agreement; repression of opposition
Aid reductions (1997)
Cameroon
1992
Restrictions on aid
Repression of opposition
 
China
1989
Restrictions on financial assistance, Exim, OPIC;
Limited export restrictions
Tiananmen Square massacre
Limited export restrictions (1991)
Cuba
1960
Comprehensive trade and financial sanctions;
Secondary sanctions to inhibit foreign investment
Castro-led takeover; military interventions in Africa (1980s); Repression of opposition
Cuban Democracy Act restricts trade of U.S. subsidiaries abroad (1992)
Helms-Burton bill codifies embargo; adds secondary sanctions against third-country investors in Cuba (1996)
Gambia
1994
Restrictions on aid
Military coup
 
Haiti
1997
Restrictions on aid
Political instability
 
India
1998
Ban on financial assistance,including Exim, OPIC;
Limited trade restrictions;
Ban on bank loans to government;
Postponement of non-humanitarian official, multilateral lending
Nuclear weapons tests
 
Indonesia
1991
Military aid restrictions; Ban on arms sales
Political repression, especially in East Timor
 
Iran
1984
Comprehensive trade and financial sanctions; Secondary sanctions to inhibit foreign investment
Support for terrorism, opposition to peace process in Middle East; efforts to acquire weapons of mass destruction
Limited export restrictions (1984)
Import boycott added (1987)
Total export embargo (1995)
Iran-Libya Sanctions Act adds secondary sanctions against foreign firms investing in oil sector (1996)
Iraq
1990
Comprehensive trade and financial sanctions,except limited oil sales under U.N. oil-for-food program
Invasion of Kuwait; post-wardiscovery of extensive program to acquire weapons of mass destruction
 
Liberia
1992
Arms embargo
Civil war
 
Libya
1978
Comprehensive trade and financial sanctions; Air travel ban
Gadhafi regime support for terrorism; bombing of Pan Am Flight #103
Limited U.S. export restrictions (1978)
U.S. boycotts Libyan oil (1982)
U.S. imposes comprehensive sanctions (1986)
U.N. imposes limited trade sanctions; air travel ban (1992-93)
Iran-Libya Sanctions Act adds secondary sanctions against foreign firms investing in oil sector (1996)
Niger
1996
Restrictions on aid
Military coup
 
Nigeria
1993
Restrictions on aid;U.S. bans all financial assistance, Exim, OPIC;Restrictions on arms sales;Travel restrictions
Abrogation of election results; execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa, other dissidents
 
North Korea
1950
Comprehensive trade and financial sanctions
Korean War; possible acquisition of nuclear weapons
U.N. threatens trade and financial sanctions to forestall nuclear weapons acquisition (1993-94)
Pakistan
1979
Ban on financial assistance,OPIC, Ex-Im, export credit guarantees;
Ban on bank loans to Pakistan's government;
Postponement of non-humanitarian loans
Nuclear weapons program; nuclear weapons tests
U.S. imposes limited sanctions (1979)
U.S. waives sanctions during Soviet intervention in Afghanistan (1980s)
U.S. expands sanctions; G-8 imposes limited sanctions (1998)
Somalia
1992
Arms embargo
Civil war
 
Sudan
1988
Comprehensive trade and financial sanctions
Civil war and human rights abuses; support for terrorism
Aid sanctions (1988-89)
Comprehensive sanctions (1997)
Syria
1986
Ban on U.S. assistance,including Ex-Im, OPIC; Limited trade restrictions
Support for terrorism
 
Vietnam
1954
Denied most-favored-nation status
Vietnam War and aftermath; personnel missing in action
Total trade embargo lifted; other restrictions remain (1994)
Yugoslavia
1991
Comprehensive trade and financial sanctions
Civil war in Bosnia; implementation of Dayton agreement ending Bosnian war; intervention in Kosovo
U.N. trade sanctions lifted, restrictions on multilateral lending, other limited sanctions remain (1995)
Additional sanctions imposed against Serbia over Kosovo (1998)
Zaire
1990
Restrictions on aid
Mobutu corruption and suppression of opposition; continued repression under Kabila regime
Sanctions continued after Kabila takeover (1998)
Zambia
1996
Restrictions on aid
Repression of opposition, human rights violations
 


SOURCE: Institute for International Economics
© Copyright 1998 The Washington Post Company
© Institute for International Economics. All rights reserved.
The Emerging Economic Superpower
When Presidents Bill Clinton and Jiang Zemin meet in Beijing, they should begin to address one of the central issues of the early twenty-first century: the global impact of China's emergence as a world economic superpower.
China was the world's largest economy throughout most of recorded history and as recently as the late nineteenth century. The World Bank estimates that, on the basis of national purchasing power, China has already passed Germany to become the third-largest economy on the globe. It could move into second place ahead of stagnant Japan in a decade or so. China already holds the world's second-largest monetary reserves (to Japan) and is the second-largest recipient of foreign direct investment (to the United States). Some Australian and Chinese economists predict that China, even if it grows at “only” 7 percent, compared with 3 percent in the United States, will supersede the United States to again become the world's largest economy by 2020-2030.
Whatever the precise details and timing, China will obviously play an increasingly central role in the world economy. Hence, it must also play a central role in global economic management.
It has already begun to do so on financial issues, as indicated by its constructive role in limiting the spread of the current Asian crisis. It has resisted the temptation to devalue its exchange rate, which would trigger another huge spiral of currency declines throughout Asia and perhaps elsewhere, with enormous effects on markets worldwide. It has stood firmly behind Hong Kong's resolve to maintain its own currency peg despite substantial market pressures. It has maintained solid (if inevitably slowing) growth and reduced interest rates, providing a lone source of regional impetus to the Asian economy. It has sustained, indeed accelerated, the liberalization of its economy in the face of market pressures from all sides.

“China, even if it grows at “only” 7 percent,
compared with 3 percent in the United States,
will supersede the United States to again become
the world's largest economy by 2020-2030.”
Moreover, China played a central role in erecting the network of financial defense mechanisms in Asia over the past few years. These arrangements proved inadequate to cope with the crisis of 1997-98 but nevertheless laid a foundation for the more substantial agreements that have now been established. China contributed $1 billion to the rescue package for Thailand (in which the United States declined to participate). These developments are stark reminders of China's importance to the world and the regional economy and promising indicators of its potential for constructive leadership even in the most difficult of situations.
Hence, China must be permitted to enter the World Trade Organization (WTO) as soon as it is ready to meet the group's rules, even if its entry is phased in over a considerable period of time. Even more importantly, China should shortly begin participating in the “finance G-7,” the club of finance ministers and central bank governors of the seven largest industrial democracies (the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada), which seeks to provide essential leadership for the world economy.
We know from history that it is critically important to engage rising superpowers in the global leadership structure on a timely basis. Germany was declared a pariah by the Treaty of Versailles after the First World War and had already felt rejected by the global leadership in the late nineteenth century, with results that were disastrous in security as well as economic terms. Japan perceived similar rejection, both before and especially after the First World War, with equally calamitous consequences. A failure to integrate China now would risk repeating these historic follies, by contrast with the world's relatively successful engagement of the rising United States in the late nineteenth century and of Germany and Japan after 1945.
The Challenges Involved
But the integration of China poses three unprecedented problems. First, China is a poor country. Its per capita purchasing power is only about $2000, less than one tenth that of the present G-7, and 350 million Chinese still live below the poverty level as defined by the World Bank. Quite understandably and properly, China thinks like a poor country, while the other top economies think like rich countries. China could thus be expected to adopt a quite different perspective on some global issues.
Second, China is far from being a true market economy despite its impressive reforms and its plans to accelerate them further. The current G-7 employ various forms of capitalism, but all are fully committed to the market.
Third, China is not a democracy. All other leading economies clearly are.
China is in fact emerging as the first economic superpower in modern times that is neither rich nor fully marketized nor democratic. Hence, both the G-7 and China will have to adopt new mindsets and new mechanisms to achieve effective cooperation.
Hong Kong might be able to help this process on the Chinese side. As a part of China that is even richer and more marketized than most of the G-7, as well as partly democratic, Hong Kong has extensive familiarity with the functioning and mechanisms of the world economy. For example, it has long been a member of the WTO (and retains its independent role there now). Many Hong Kongers hope, with some reason, that China will evolve in their direction over the agreed 50-year transition period. Early engagement of China in the global economic system would provide another avenue to enable Hong Kong to support constructive evolution on the mainland as well as to achieve its own goals.


“China should shortly begin
participating in the “finance G-7,”
the club of finance ministers and central bank governors
of the seven largest industrial democracies.”

A key question is whether China wants to play a global economic leadership role. As it struggles with its internal reforms, most crucially the acknowledged imperatives of marketizing the moribund state-owned enterprises and recapitalizing the fragile banking system, there will be strong temptations to avoid international compacts and to preserve maximum domestic flexibility. This is why China has not yet made the commitments that would enable it to join the WTO.
But it is clearly in the interest of the United States and the rest of the world to encourage China to expand its international perspective as rapidly as possible. Doing so would help the reformers tilt the internal Chinese debate in directions that will minimize, if not avoid, future economic conflicts. It would encourage and perhaps accelerate the inevitable transformation of China's political regime. Our experience with postwar Japan, while far from perfect and subject to many crucial differences with the situation in China, suggests that we should make every effort to engage the rising economic superpower in global leadership institutions—including to help influence its own policy outcomes.
Is It Too Soon?
Some may regard this issue as premature. China, after all, is not yet in the WTO. Its currency is not yet fully convertible. Its economic reforms have a considerable distance yet to travel to ensure sustained growth and, in light of the weaknesses in its banking system, to avoid a repetition of the financial distress that is sweeping most of Asia.
In light of China's continued failure to democratize, its inclusion in the G-7 summits, with their far-reaching political implications, would indeed be premature. China's situation is opposite to that of Russia, whose economy is relatively unimportant on a global scale (except as a potential source of disruption), but which has been invited to the summits because of its strategic significance now that it has become at least a nascent democracy.
But the pace of China's economic advance is awesome. Its average income quadrupled over the past 17 years. It jumped from the world's 34th to 10th largest trader during that period.
These advances are likely to persist. Before the outbreak of the current crisis in the region, the World Bank believed that China's growth would continue at 8-10 percent annually. Former Premier Li Peng publicly set a goal of full marketization by 2010. As a member of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, China has committed to achieve “free trade and investment in the region” by no later than 2020 and has thus implicitly committed to achieve global free trade by then as well because of APEC's devotion to “open regionalism.”
Moreover, for the reasons just cited, the engagement of China with the world's economic leaders represents an enormous challenge as well as a policy imperative and will take considerable time to work out. One key purpose of proceeding now is to help China's leaders to adjust gradually to their new position and develop the necessary global viewpoints. Based on its role in the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, which it joined shortly after launching its reforms in the late 1970s, China could be expected to listen and learn for a considerable transition period. The United States and Europe provided a similar opportunity for Japan in the 1960s and early 1970s, which resulted in Tokyo's relatively smooth (if still incomplete) assimilation into the leadership structure.
The Bilateral Imbalance
In addition to these positive reasons for Presidents Clinton and Jiang to stress global economic leadership issues, the short-term bilateral concerns that have dominated the economic dimension of the relationship to date must be placed in proper perspective.
It is true that official US data suggest that our bilateral trade deficit is now worse with China than it ever became with Japan. In 1987, the ratio of our imports to exports with Japan peaked at 3:1. Hence, our exports to Japan had to rise three times as fast as our imports rose just to keep the deficit from increasing. (In fact, our exports thereafter rose six times as fast as our imports so the deficit declined modestly in dollar terms and the ratio dropped to 1.75:1 by 1996 before starting to climb again more recently.) With China now, our imports exceed our exports by a ratio of 4.5:1. The latter must therefore climb four and a half times as rapidly to avoid further deterioration of the bilateral imbalance in dollar terms.
These ratios are a more meaningful way to assess bilateral imbalances than the absolute numbers, which are now running at $40-50 billion annually with China (and more with Japan), because they better illustrate the prospects for rectifying the situation. And the bilateral imbalances, despite their limited economic relevance, are critically important in political terms because they are demonstrably the best single explanation for trade conflicts between the United States and individual Asian countries.1

“China is in fact emerging as
the first economic superpower in modern times
that is neither rich nor fully marketized
nor democratic.”
There are five mitigating considerations, however. First, all serious observers acknowledge that, just as the official Chinese data grossly underestimate China's surplus with the United States, the US data substantially overstate that imbalance. Many US “imports from China” include substantial value added in entrepôt Hong Kong. Some US “exports to Hong Kong” are actually destined for China. The US numbers currently overstate our deficit with China by about $10 billion per year,2 so that the actual ratio between imports and exports is about 2.5:1 rather than 4.5:1—which is nevertheless still substantial.
Second, however, bilateral trade imbalances are far less important than global current account positions (including trade in services and goods), and viewing all economic partners together. We would hardly raise barriers to trade with Saudi Arabia because our large oil imports produce a bilateral deficit with that country. We would not want Australia to raise barriers against us because our manufactured products give us a large surplus there.
In the case of Japan, our large bilateral trade deficit does reflect the broader reality that Japan runs huge and chronic global current account surpluses that have made it by far the world's largest creditor country. By contrast, China's global current account shows a modest surplus in 1996-98 and was in large deficit as recently as 1993. Its reserves of about $130 billion, the world's second largest (to Japan), are nearly matched by its external debt of $120 billion. Hence, it cannot be viewed as a chronic surplus or creditor country, nor should it be pushed to undertake adjustment actions of the type so sorely needed in Japan. (Indeed, as already noted, the main risk on the currency front is that it might devalue rather than revalue upward.)
Third, and perhaps most important politically, 90 percent of US imports from China were previously imported from other countries and only 10 percent displace production in this country.3 China has in essence been seizing market share from other countries, especially Hong Kong and Taiwan, both of which (especially Hong Kong) have shifted much of their export production to China. The United States in fact now runs substantial bilateral surpluses with Hong Kong and our deficits with Taiwan have fallen sharply as a result. The increase in our global deficit has therefore been much more modest than the bilateral shift with China.
Fourth, a new study of The Costs of Protection in China, conducted for the Institute for International Economics by three leading Chinese economists at the independent Unirule Institute in Beijing under the guidance of noted Chinese reformer Mao Yushi, reveals that China's trade protection, while extensive in the state-controlled sector, is on a rough par with that of Japan and South Korea in overall terms. Both those countries of course have much higher income levels than China, have been members of the WTO for over three decades, and are generally considered to be much farther down the road to full marketization.
Fifth, the United States blocks a considerable volume of its own sales to China through export controls. Such controls are maintained to pursue a variety of US national security and foreign policy goals, including limitation of nuclear proliferation, blockage of the availability of “dual use” items, and expression of disapproval for the 1989 events in Tiananmen Square. Studies at the Institute for International Economics suggest that annual US exports are reduced by $3.5-13.5 billion of 1991-level exports as a result (and that there is little payoff in terms of actually achieving the foreign policy goals).4
China's remaining barriers to trade are formidable and, like those of any major economy, should be liberalized as quickly as possible. Bilateral trade imbalances, despite their limited economic relevance, clearly have political salience here at home. Hence, the United States should maintain its pressure on China to accelerate the opening of its economy. But any serious appraisal of the bilateral situation reinforces the conclusion that, at the upcoming summit, the United States should begin to place primary emphasis on the broad systemic question of China's growing role in the international economic order and how to manage its entry into the leadership structure thereof.
Conclusion
When Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger met with Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai to renew relations between the United States and China in the early 1970s, they focused on the global strategic position of the two countries. The leaders acknowledged the important differences between their nations but figured out how to cooperate effectively in the setting of the Cold War.
Presidents Clinton and Jiang must address a series of immediate bilateral issues, including pressing security and political as well as short-term economic topics, when they meet in Beijing. They should of course focus on their countries' overall strategic relationship. But now that the Cold War is over and economics has moved to or at least toward the top of the global agenda, as dramatized by the current Asian crisis and China's pivotal role in countering it, the leaders should begin to tackle China's emerging role in the global economic order.
The leaders should bring the festering issue of WTO membership to a clear resolution by agreeing on what China must do to join and by discerning, as best they can, how long it will take to get there. They should begin the process of China's entry into the “finance G-7,” perhaps augmented by bilateral US-China consultations to facilitate the process. By addressing these topics now, the two presidents could anticipate a critical set of problems that the world must face over the coming decade, help to promote a constructive evolution of both economic policy and political structure in China itself, and start building a new framework for the overall relationship between the two countries.
Notes
1. Noland, Marcus. 1997. Chasing Phantoms: The Political Economy of USTR. International Organization 51, no. 3: 365-88.
2. Lardy, Nicholas R. 1994. China in the World Economy. Washington: Institute for International Economics. Updated through 1995 by the US-China Business Council in June 1996.
3. Noland, Marcus. 1996. US-China Economic Relations, Washington: Institute for International Economics.
4. Richardson, J. David. 1993. Sizing Up U.S. Export Disincentives. Washington: Institute for International Economics.

The turmoil that has rocked Asian foreign exchange and equity markets over the past eight months is the third major currency crisis of the 1990s. Its predecessors were the crisis in the European Monetary System in 1992-93, and the Mexican peso crisis of 1994-95.
Equity and currency markets in the most affected countries recorded huge drops-ranging from 20-75 percent-during the second half of 1997. Reflecting the effects of the crisis, growth rates for emerging Asia (excluding China) this year are now expected to be only marginally positive (1-2 percent), and Thailand, Indonesia, and South Korea are likely to suffer outright recessions.
The crisis will also have significant spillover effects outside the region. The IMF recently revised downward its 1998 projection for global growth from 4.5 to 3.8 percent. In the United States, most analysts estimate that the crisis will cause growth this year to be one half to three-quarters of a percentage point lower than would otherwise be the case.
This paper has a dual objective: first, to explain how the crisis rose and spread; and second, to outline the kinds of corrective policy measures that would help end the crisis and reduce the chances of a recurrence.
Origins of the Crisis
Like other financial crises of years past, the Asian crisis can be traced to a set of interrelated problems. In this case, three factors predominated: financial-sector weaknesses cum easy global liquidity conditions, problems in the external sector, and contagion running from Thailand to other economies.
Financial-sector weaknesses cum easy global liquidity conditions-More than anything else, it was financial-sector weaknesses that got the Asian countries into deep trouble. During the 1990s, each of the ASEAN 4 economies (Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines) experienced a credit boom, that is, the growth of bank and non-bank credit to the private sector exceeded by a wide margin the already rapid growth of the real economy. The credit boom was stoked in part by large net private capital inflows, and much of it was directed to real estate and equities. This overextension and concentration of credit left the ASEAN 4 economies vulnerable to a shift in credit conditions. When that shift came, induced by a need to control overheating and to defend fixed exchange rates, it brought with it, inter alia, falling property prices and a rising share of non-performing bank loans. Because the credit boom ended earlier in Thailand and Indonesia, the effects were first visible there.
Vulnerability was also heightened-particularly in Thailand and Indonesia (and later on in South Korea)-because banks and their corporate customers, in an effort to lower borrowing cost, undertook most of their foreign borrowing at short maturities and in foreign currency. These liquidity and currency mismatches eventually took their toll-both in motivating speculative attacks and in limiting the authorities' room for maneuver.
These financial-sector problems could not have progressed so far were it not for long-standing weaknesses in banking and financial-sector supervision. Loan classification and provisioning practices were too lax; there was too much "connected" and "policy-directed" lending; state-owned banks did not pay much attention to the creditworthiness of borrowers; bank capital was often inadequate relative to the riskiness of banks' operating environment; and there were strong expectations of government bailouts should banks get into difficulties. On top of this, the quality of public disclosure and transparency was poor.

"Like other financial crises of years past,
the Asian crisis can be traced to a
set of interrelated problems"

Of course, it takes two (lenders as well as borrowers) to tango. It is well to recall that the 1990s were a time of bountiful global liquidity conditions, with over $420 billion in net private capital flows going to Asian developing countries alone; spreads declined, maturities lengthened, and loan covenants weakened. The presence of historically low interest rates in Tokyo also gave rise to a large "carry trade," where funds could be borrowed directly from Japanese institutions or intermediated via U.S. lenders. And much like Mexico before its crisis, the ASEAN 4 countries were viewed as among the most attractive emerging-market borrowers, with a history of rapid economic growth, high saving and investment rates, disciplined fiscal positions, and growing integration with the world economy.
External-sector problems-Most of the affected countries had run moderate to large current-account deficits during the 1990s (in 1996, Thailand registered a current-account deficit of about 8 percent of GDP). For quite a while, these external deficits were viewed as "benign," since they did not result from large public-sector imbalances and since foreign borrowing was being used mainly to increase investment (rather than consumption). But in 1996 and 1997, concerns mounted on several counts.
For one thing, attention shifted from the quantity to the quality of investment. Too much of the investment was directed at speculative activities, overextended industries, over-ambitious infrastructure projects, and inefficient government monopolies. Competitiveness in the ASEAN 4 economies also seemed to be waning, as indicated, by appreciations of real effective exchange rates (relative to a ten year trend), by sharp slowdowns in merchandise export receipts in 1996, and by a perceived shift in regional comparative advantage toward China. Moreover, the sustainability of Asian external deficits seemed threatened by overproduction in certain industries (e.g., autos, memory chips, petrochemicals, steel, wood products, etc.) and by intense export competition in the region.
Contagion-The third contributing factor to the crisis was the contagion of financial disturbances across countries. The Asian crisis is unusual in that it originated in a small country (Thailand) and spread to a wider set of economies, including some larger ones.
In analyzing the channels of contagion, it seems unlikely that bilateral trade or investment shares with Thailand could have been the driving force: these shares are just too small to generate such wide-ranging contagion. Instead, two other channels are more plausible. One is the "wake-up call" hypothesis. It says that Thailand acted as a wake-up call for international investors to reassess creditworthiness of Asian borrowers and when they did that reassessment, they found that a quite a few of these economies had weaknesses similar to those in Thailand (that is, weak financial sectors with poor prudential supervision, large external imbalances, appreciating real exchange rates, declining quality of investment, etc.). The other major contagion channel results from the dynamics of devaluation. As one country after another undergoes a depreciation, the countries who have not devalued experience a deterioration in competitiveness, which in turn makes their currencies more vulnerable to a speculative attack.
And as the number of countries affected by the crisis grew, other multilateral channels of trade and capital flow interdependence also generated spillovers. For example, the problems at Indonesia's banks and corporates have rebounded to the disadvantage of Singapore's banks, the crisis-induced weakening of primary commodity prices has hurt Chile's exports, and the difficulties experienced by Korean banks have had adverse knock-on effects as far away as Russia and Brazil (since Korean banks were heavy purchasers of both Russian GKOs and of Brazilian Brady bonds and liquidated much of their holdings during the crisis).
How To Fix It
Just as the Asian crisis did not arise from a single source, there is not a single silver bullet that will fix it. The main policy imperatives can be grouped under the following four headings.
Financial sector reform in the ASEAN 4 economies and in South Korea-Because of the key role that financial-sector fragility played in motivating the crisis, efforts to overcome that fragility must be the centerpiece of the recovery strategy. Insolvent banks and finance companies should be resolved (equity holders should lose their stake and management should be replaced), while those that are undercapitalized should be recapitalized to meet international standards. Foreign ownership limits should be liberalized. Each of the crisis countries also should commit itself to upgrade significantly its system of financial supervision and regulation. A tangible way to illustrate this commitment would be for them to sign on to the Basle Committee's new "Core Principles of Effective Banking Supervision," and to ask the IMF and the World Bank to monitor their compliance with these principles.
Recovery and reform in Japan-As the region's largest economy, Japan has to become part of the solution to the crisis-not a tinder box that hinders crisis management. This means, first of all, that Japanese domestic demand needs to achieve a satisfactory rate of growth. This would enable Japan to absorb its fair share of Asian exports, and it would help to end the downward slide of the yen. The fiscal stimulus package announced by Premier Hashimoto in late February is once again much too small; it should at least be tripled. Second, Japan must get its bad loan problem behind it. This would increase the room for maneuver in rescheduling the bad loans of banks in the crisis countries (as well as boost confidence in Japan itself). The good news is that the Japanese authorities have finally discarded the fantasy that they can resolve their bad loan problem without recourse to sizeable public funds (30 trillion yen). The bad news is that public funds may be used to prop up weak banks, and that serious systemic reforms may once again be delayed.
The role of the IMF-The IMF has recently been subject to sharp criticism on many fronts. With the exception of the "moral hazard" argument, most of this criticism is off the mark.
Some argue that the crisis countries didn't need strong IMF medicine because they were merely victims of a (negative) shift of sentiment on the part of international investors. This ignores the serious financial-sector weaknesses and external imbalance problems outlined above. The market may have overshot once the crisis got started, but the "innocent bystander" hypothesis simply doesn't wash.
Nor does the criticism that the Fund is no longer necessary stand up to scrutiny. Without access to conditional official financing, countries are likely to respond to external deficits with larger deflations and greater resort to competitive devaluations and to trade and exchange controls (as dramatically illustrated by the experience of the 1920s and 1930s). Even with a near $50 billion rescue package, Mexico underwent a 6 percent decline in real output in 1995-its deepest recession in five decades. The Thai, Indonesian, and South Korean economies will probably contract this year by several percent. What would growth and social stability be in these countries without any official financing? And would it be better if the policy conditionality in these rescue packages were administered by individual creditor countries (with all the political overtones that would imply) rather than by an international institution with a constitutional mandate to provide conditional financing? Surely not.
The charge that the IMF is being too intrusive by making detailed recommendations about financial-sector reform and corporate governance misses the point that wholesale reform of banks, finance companies, conglomerates, and government monopolies is absolutely crucial if the crisis countries are to regain confidence and market access to private financing. After all, the crisis occurred in good measure because these needed reforms had been too long delayed.
The Fund has also been criticized for recommending higher interest rates, bank closure, and tighter fiscal policy. But experience suggests that it is difficult to stabilize a rapidly declining currency without a temporary period of high interest rates (recall the case of the Mexican peso in early 1995), and that allowing insolvent banks/thrifts to remain open encourages "gambling for resurrection" that can add significantly to the ultimate public-sector tab of banking problems (recall the U.S. saving and loan crisis). If there was a mistake in Indonesia, it was that the authorities did not close enough insolvent banks.
In retrospect, a somewhat easier fiscal stance may well have been appropriate for the crisis countries but the Fund has shown that it is willing to be flexible on fiscal targets when growth turns out to be weaker than expected. In any case, the initial ineffectiveness of the rescue packages in stabilizing markets was not primarily due to the monetary and fiscal targets in the Fund programs but rather to other factors (namely, convincing market participants that structural reform was really going to happen, political instabilities in the crisis countries, and uncertainties about how the short-term debt overhang was going to be resolved).
The one criticism of the Fund (and of the main creditor countries) that stands on the firmest ground is the "moral hazard" argument, that is, the provision of insurance by the official sector that acts as a subsidy to risk taking and results in too many resources being channeled into the insured activities. Despite the conclusions drawn by the G-10 after the Mexican crisis (e.g., that governments should resist pressures to assume responsibility for the external liabilities of their private sectors), actions by the official sector in the Korean crisis helped insulate private creditors of Korean banks from bearing the full consequences of poor lending decisions. If the official safety net becomes wider and wider over time, we can expect private lenders to increasingly channel international capital flows to those borrowers who are deemed "too large to fail." The only thing that will deter excessive risk taking is the expectation of taking a significant loss, which requires that lenders sometimes do take a significant loss. Equity and bond holders have taken large losses but many large creditors of banks have been shielded more than they should have been. Without the deterrent of losses, market spreads on emerging-market paper will not price risk appropriately, and pleas to banks and corporates to make good internal risk management the first line of defense against crises will likely fall on deaf ears. In addition, bailing-out large uninsured creditors makes it difficult to sell the principle of equitable burden-sharing and could jeopardize public support for IMF funding more generally.
Improving the crisis prevention/crisis management architecture-As in the aftermath of the Mexican crisis, the official sector ought to use the heightened awareness of crisis vulnerability to improve the international architecture of crisis prevention and crisis management. Three items should receive high priority in any Halifax II discussions.
First, a way needs to be found to facilitate a more orderly rescheduling of private external debt. The fact that such procedures had not been well thought out prior to the current crisis has meant that official rescue packages have turned out to be much larger than anyone anticipated, with longer-term moral hazard effects having to play second fiddle to short-term (but admittedly important) financial stability concerns. What is needed is a set of agreed principles and procedures that can reduce the uncertainty surrounding the restructuring and rescheduling of private debt. The discussion should focus, inter alia, on how to limit the use of blanket government guarantees, on the application of the IMF's "lending into arrears" policy, on the representation of debtor and creditor groups in rescheduling negotiations, and on the options that will be most helpful in resolving the problem (e.g., equity for debt exchanges, the substitution of long-term for short-term instruments, etc.).
A second priority item concerns banking supervision and financial-sector infrastructure in emerging economies. Now that agreement has been reached on the Basle Core Principles of Effective Banking Supervision, a target date should be set for having countries sign on to it. In addition, countries should be encouraged to adopt domestic bankruptcy codes that respect the rights of foreign and domestic creditors and to enact deposit insurance arrangements that protect small retail depositors.
Item number three on my proposed agenda falls under the heading of data standards and public transparency and disclosure. More specifically, the IMF's Special Data Dissemination Standard should be amended to cover timely reporting of the maturity and currency composition of external debt, as well as net international reserves (inclusive of government commitments in the forward exchange market). On a parallel track, monitoring of the Basle Core Principles should pay particular attention to more timely reporting and to a stricter (standard) definition of non-performing bank loans.
To conclude, despite the breadth and depth of the Asian financial crisis and the limited success achieved thus far in combating it, the successful resolution of the crisis does not require either a new game plan or a new IMF. Much more has been right than wrong about the overall design of official rescue packages, and there is still time to improve the market discipline and burden-sharing aspects. A sustained upward turn will come when the crisis countries have made enough progress in implementing structural reforms to convince markets that things have really changed, and when there is enough rescheduling of private debt to reduce uncertainty and moral hazard.
